The Fed is about to cut rates for the first time since 2008 as trade war weighs on economic growth
The Fed is expected to cut interest rates for the first time in more than a decade Wednesday, a pre-emptive move as concerns rise about the impact of the trade wars and a slowing global economy. Friday’s July jobs report should show that the U.S. economy is still strong, with 170,000 nonfarm payrolls being added and an extremely low unemployment rate of 3.7%, according to Refinitiv. That follows this past Friday’s report of second -quarter GDP, which grew at a better than expected 2.1% but showed clear signs of impact from tariffs and trade friction. Stocks gained in the past week, with the S&P 500 and Nasdaq hitting new highs, as investors anticipated a Fed rate cut, and also a better-than-expected earnings season. Earnings growth is slightly positive so far this quarter, but that could improve with another big wave of earnings in the week ahead, when nearly a third of the S&P 500 report. Apple, Exxon Mobil, Procter and Gamble, Merck, General Motors and Verizon are among companies reporting. Beyond Meat, the hot IPO with a market cap bigger than a quarter of companies in the S&P 500, reports Monday. Seventy-five percent of companies have beaten estimates so far and 60% beat revenue expectations. It will be the Fed though that will likely have the most market impact, and strategists are looking for the central bank to signal it is open to future cuts but not necessarily promising them. Economists mostly expect anywhere from one to three rate cuts this year, but there is near consensus that this first cut will be a quarter percentage point. “The market is pricing in a 25 basis point cut,” said Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist with Prudential Financial. “We already know of two Fed presidents who don’t think we need it, so there’s obviously going to be a discussion, with the strong data. The chairman, who is in the camp that we need to have an insurance cut, is going to make the case that while the economic data are all gaining strength, they are still worried about weakening conditions, due to uncertainty regarding trade and tariffs.” The strains of the trade war and tariffs showed up in a reduction in gross private domestic investment in second quarter GDP of 5.5%, the worst decline in that category since 2015. Within that, exports fell 5.2%. The decline in business investment wiped a full percentage point from the final GDP number.
US-China trade talks resume in Shanghai with tempered expectations
U.S. and Chinese trade representatives are about to begin their first official in-person meeting since the G-20 truce, but neither side is showing any sense of urgency for a deal. The two-day meeting, set to begin Tuesday in Shanghai, follows a truce reached last month by President Donald Trump and Chinese leader Xi Jinping in their trade war. Expectations for a long-term resolution remain low: Beijing is awaiting Washington’s stance on Huawei and Trump believes China may hold out until the 2020 election. “I don’t think personally China would sign a deal if I had a 2% chance of losing the election,” Trump said Friday. “I think China would probably say: ‘Let’s wait. Let’s wait. Maybe Trump will lose and we can deal with another dope, or another stiff.”’ White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow told CNBC on Friday he “wouldn’t expect any grand deal” at the meeting in Shanghai. “Talking to our negotiators, I think they’re going to reset the stage and hopefully go back to where the talks left off last May,” Kudlow said. China believes it has extended the olive branch by following through on the promise of repurchasing American agricultural products. Millions of tons of U.S. soybean have been shipped to China since July 19, Chinese state media Xinhua reported Sunday. It said many Chinese companies have made inquiries to U.S. suppliers in the past week for purchasing new such products as soybeans, cotton, pork and sorghum. The People’s Daily, the official newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party, called it a pragmatic move that “once again shows China’s sincerity.” China wants the U.S. to reciprocate. It is pushing to get the U.S. to lift restrictions on Chinese telecom giant Huawei, which the Trump administration blacklisted in May at the height of the trade war, effectively halting its ability to buy U.S.-made chips. Xinhua reported Friday that Chinese authorities suspect FedEx violated the law by blocking more than 100 shipments from Huawei. Trump last week met with several tech companies including Google and Broadcom and agreed to give “timely licensing decisions” to allow them to sell to Huawei, which the U.S. accuses of having ties to the Chinese military. However, many lawmakers still strongly oppose any relief for Huawei, seeing it as a major threat to national security. “The U.S. should take concrete measures to implement the relevant U.S. commitments and create favorable conditions for bilateral economic and trade cooperation,” Xinhua said.
Former Fed Chair Janet Yellen says she’s in favor of an interest rate cut
Former Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen said she supports a 25-basis-point cut in the central bank’s benchmark interest rate, as the global economy weakens and inflation in the United States is lower. “The global economy has weakened. I think partly it’s weakened because of conflicts over trade and the uncertainty that’s caused for businesses,” Yellen said at an Aspen Economic Strategy Group meeting in Aspen, Colorado, on Sunday evening. The U.S. central bank is widely expected to cut interest rates by a quarter point on Wednesday for the first time in more than a decade. That’s despite recent economic data indicating that the U.S. economy is still going strong. The July jobs report is predicted to show 170,000 nonfarm payrolls being added and an extremely low unemployment rate of 3.7%, according to Refinitiv. On Friday, data showed that the U.S. economy grew at a better than expected 2.1% in the second quarter, due in part to strong consumer expenditure.
GDP slows to 2.1% in second quarter but beats expectations thanks to strong consumer
Growth decelerated in the second quarter, but not by as much as Wall Street thought, as tariffs and a global slowdown weighed on the U.S. economy, the Commerce Department reported Friday. GDP increased 2.1%, down from the first quarter’s 3.1% and the weakest increase since Q1 of 2017 when President Donald Trump took office. Dow Jones Q2 estimates were for 2% growth. However, the underlying numbers in the report seemed to take steam out of the recession fears that have been much of the talk among economists and policymakers at the Federal Reserve. “The recession talk was always overstated,” said Michael Arone, chief investment strategist at State Street Global Advisors. “Those that were doing the Chicken Little, the sky is falling, we’re headed for recession talk were clearly early in that assessment. The economic data continue to suggest that the economy isn’t near recession, at least in the next year or so.” Trump himself deemed the report “not bad” and noted that growth was continuing despite what he considers overly tight monetary policy from the Federal Reserve. The president’s top economic adviser Larry Kudlow expressed similar sentiments in a CNBC interview. “I think it’s almost a miracle that the economy is growing as rapidly as it is,” Kudlow said on “Squawk on the Street.” “This has not been easy with seven rate hikes.” Consumer and government spending helped propel GDP in the April-to-June period, while a pullback in business investment weighed on the number. Personal consumption expenditures rose 4.3%, the best performance since the fourth quarter of 2017. Government consumption expenditures and gross investment rose 5%, the fastest pace since Q2 of 2009 as the economy was coming out of the Great Recession. Get the market reaction here. At the same time, gross private domestic investment tumbled 5.5%, the worst since Q4 in 2015 as spending on structures slumped 10.6%. The decline pulled a full percentage point from the final GDP number. Falling inventories also acted as a 0.86 percentage point drag. Worries over the back-and-forth tariff battle between the U.S. and China have been a major driver of business sentiment, with executives expressing concern, both in surveys and earnings calls. The GDP report comes amid growing concern that the weakening growth hitting much of the world’s economy is spilling over into the U.S. While consumer activity has been strong, manufacturing growth has slumped recently and housing remains a weak spot. “The data clearly shows signs of a bifurcated economy. Weakness in manufacturing has weighed on components like inventories and fixed investment, but the healthy U.S. consumer has helped buoy the economy as seen in the stable reading on personal consumption expenditures,” Michael Reynolds, investment strategy officer at Glenmede, said in a note. “Altogether, robust domestic consumers are more than offsetting the headwinds of a weakening manufacturing economy.”
Fed expected to cut rates as economy feels trade war impact, despite strengthening consumer
The Fed is expected to move ahead to cut interest rates by a quarter point Wednesday after second quarter GDP shows inflation is still sluggish and trade wars are impacting business and trade. GDP rose 2.1%, down from 3.1% in the first quarter but better than the 2% expected by economists surveyed by Dow Jones. The report revealed a much stronger than expected consumer, with consumption up 4.3%, the best since the fourth quarter of 2017. Market strategists said while growth was better than expected, the components of the report could justify the Fed’s desire to cut interest rates as a type of ‘insurance’ against a slowdown. Inflation is tame, but the trade war is taking a toll on business, with exports down 5.2%. Core PCE inflation, followed closely by the Fed, rose 1.8%, was still below the Fed’s 2% target. However, inflation was stronger than the 1.1% in the first quarter, which was revised a tenth of a percentage point lower. “We have a very tight labor market. We have ongoing wage gains. We have strong consumer optimism. That combination should lead to solid consumption, but because of the lack of inflationary pressure, the Fed has space to ease policy to extend the cycle,” said Jon Hill, rate strategist at BMO. On the business side, gross private domestic investment fell 5.5%, the worst decline since Q4 in 2015 as spending on structures fell 10.6%. The decline wiped a full percentage point from the final GDP number. “Business spending was hit,” said Hill, noting that government spending helped support it. “The forward looking risks are still there. There are still risks around the trade war. There’s risks around Brexit. There are risks around a deteriorating global economy,” said Hill. The market consensus has been firmly of the view the Fed will cut rates by a quarter point, though some strategists say it could be 50 basis points, and comments from New York Fed President John Williams last week stirred up speculation of a more aggressive Fed. After the GDP report, bond yields temporarily rose, with the 10-year reaching a high of 2.10% before slipping back down to 2.07%. The fed fund futures reflect a less than 20% probability of a half percentage point cut next week and more than 80% odds of a quarter point cut. “The trade war has screwed up the pacing of inventory accumulation. There’s a reason we had a really huge build in Q1,” said Tom Simons, money market economist at Jefferies. “Some businesses that were going to see tariffs or see price increases were going to bring it forward...By the same token you can see a deceleration or depletion of inventories as people sell off stuff ... It’s definitely caused a disruption.” The Fed has said it was worried about slowing global growth, the possible impact of trade wars and low inflation. It has also said it would act to extend the economic expansion, if needed. “Anybody who was looking for 50 basis points should abandon that expectation after this number today,” said Simons.
Strong consumer spending vs. weak business investment: What really matters for the US economy
U.S. consumer spending, the biggest part of the economy, saved the day for the record-long expansion, but a big decline in business investments raised concerns about how much longer it can last. Personal consumption expenditures rose 4.3% in the second quarter, the best performance in six quarters, whereas gross private domestic investment tumbled 5.5%, the worst since the fourth quarter in 2015 as spending on structures slumped 10.6%. The drop in business spending chopped a full percentage point off of the final GDP number. “The fact the investment looks so weak reflects that global forces are creating challenges for business investment and those forces mostly owe to the trade war. It has weakened the trajectory for here in the U.S.,” said Michelle Meyer, head of U.S. economics at Bank of America. “The consumer is much more insulated from those risks.” The current economic expansion keeps trucking along, officially marking the longest in U.S. history. GDP rose 2.1% in the second quarter, down from 3.1% in the first quarter but slightly higher than the 2% estimates. However, with the boost from 2018 tax cuts fading away and trade tensions weighing on businesses, the weakness in business spending has economists worried how long the consumer can keep carrying the economy. “Soft business investment in the second quarter is a concern. Some of that was tied to a downturn in investment in energy as commodity prices fell. It could also be that businesses are holding back on capital spending because of trade tensions and associated uncertainty,” PNC Chief Economist Gus Faucher said. “Consumer spending won’t continue to grow at a 4% pace, but solid job growth and rising wages will allow households to increase their spending through the rest of this year and into 2020,” Faucher added.
Recount shows Trump didn’t get his 3% growth in 2018 after all
The government’s latest update on economic output dashed the Trump administration’s longstanding hope for 3% GDP growth in 2018. The Commerce Department’s Friday report on the strength of the economy showed that gross domestic product expanded 2.5% on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis last year and 2.9% from the prior year. That marks a downgrade to a previous estimate of 3% and an upwardly revised 2.8% in 2017.
US factory orders for large manufactured goods surged 2% in June
Orders to U.S. factories for large manufactured goods rose last month after sharp declines the previous two months, propelled by demand for commercial aircraft and cars. A category that tracks business investment had its biggest increase in four months. The Commerce Department said Thursday that orders for durable goods — or items meant to last at least three years — rose 2%, after a 2.3% decline in May and an even bigger 2.8% drop in April. A category that serves as a proxy for business investment rose 1.9%, its best showing since February. Aircraft orders, typically a volatile category, jumped about 75%, after falling more than 50% in May and almost 40% in April. Orders for cars and auto parts increased 3.1%, its biggest increase since July of 2018.
US weekly jobless claims fall to a 3-month low
The number of Americans filing applications for unemployment benefits fell to a three-month low last week, pointing to sustained labor market strength even as the economy appears to be losing momentum. Initial claims for state unemployment benefits dropped 10,000 to a seasonally adjusted 206,000 for the week ended July 20, the lowest level since mid-April, the Labor Department said on Thursday. Data for the prior week was unrevised. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast claims would increase to 219,000 in the latest week. The Labor Department said no claims were estimated last week. The four-week moving average of initial claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 5,750 to 213,000 last week. Layoffs remain low despite a bitter trade war between the United States and China, which has helped to cloud the economic outlook and boost expectations the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates next Wednesday for the first time in a decade. Thursday’s claims report also showed the number of people receiving benefits after an initial week of aid fell 13,000 to 1.68 million for the week ended July 13. The four-week moving average of the so-called continuing claims slipped 4,500 to 1.70 million. The continuing claims data covered the week the government surveyed households for July’s unemployment rate. The four-week average of continuing claims rose 9,000 between the June and July survey weeks, suggesting little change in the jobless rate this month. The unemployment rate ticked up one-tenth of a percentage point to 3.7% in June.
Based on what people are searching for on Google, a recession is nowhere near
If what Americans look for on Google is any indication, we’re nowhere near a recession. DataTrek Research examined domestic internet searches for words like “coupon” and “unemployment,” which were leading indicators of the Great Recession, and found that search volumes are down significantly. They also looked at “TV” and other media sources like YouTube and Netflix, since workers who have their hours cut back often have more time to consume media. “If the Federal Reserve looked at Google Trends they might not be so inclined to cut rates next week,” said Nicholas Colas, co-founder of DataTrek Research. Markets are widely anticipating that the central bank will cut its benchmark interest rate next week regardless of some strong consumer data recently and a record-breaking stock market. Job growth rebounded in June with the best gain since January, running contrary to worries that both the employment and overall growth picture were weakening. The unemployment rate edged up to 3.7%, according to the Labor Department. While weekly initial claims data and the monthly jobs report shows employment trends after layoffs start, online searches for “unemployment” could be an even earlier indicator, according to Colas. People search for the term when they fear a layoff is imminent. Google searches for “unemployment” started increasing in 2005 by more than 5% year over year. Today, there’s no change in Google searches and June 2019 was basically flat compared to last year. April and May were slightly lower.
US existing home sales fell 1.7% in June, vs 0.2% drop expected
U.S. home sales fell more than expected in June as a persistent shortage of properties pushed prices to a record high, suggesting the housing market was struggling to regain its footing since hitting a soft patch last year. The National Association of Realtors said on Tuesday existing home sales dropped 1.7% to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 5.27 million units last month. May’s sales pace was revised higher to 5.36 million units from the previously reported 5.34 million units. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast existing home sales slipping 0.2% to a rate of 5.33 million units in June. Existing home sales, which make up about 90 percent of U.S. home sales, decreased 2.2% from a year ago. That was the 16th straight year-on-year decline in home sales. The weakness in housing comes despite cheaper mortgage rates and the lowest unemployment rate in nearly 50 years. Supply has continued to lag, especially in the lower-price segment of the housing market because of land and labor shortages, as well as expensive building materials. The government reported last week that permits for future home construction dropped to a two-year low in June. The 30-year fixed mortgage rate has dropped to an average of 3.81% from a more than seven-year peak of 4.94% in November, according to data from mortgage finance agency Freddie Mac. Further declines are likely as the Federal Reserve is expected to cut interest rates next week for the first time in a decade. Last month, existing home sales rose in the Northeast and Midwest. They tumbled in the populous South and in the West. There were 1.93 million previously owned homes on the market in June, up from 1.91 million in May and unchanged from a year ago. The median existing house price increased 4.3% from a year ago to $285,7000 in June, an all-time high. At June’s sales pace, it would take 4.4 months to exhaust the current inventory, up from 4.3 months in May. A six-to-seven-month supply is viewed as a healthy balance between supply and demand.
Elizabeth Warren says the ‘warning lights are flashing’ for the next economic crash
Democratic presidential contender Sen. Elizabeth Warren warned on Monday that the next financial crisis is on its way. “Warning lights are flashing. Whether it’s this year or next year, the odds of another economic downturn are high — and growing,” Warren wrote in a post on the blogging platform Medium. The Massachusetts Democrat said that increasing household and corporate debt has left the economy on precarious footing. Citing a top economist, Warren wrote that a failure to raise the debt ceiling in September could be “more catastrophic” than the 2008 collapse of Lehman Brothers. She also noted weakness in the manufacturing sector, putting the blame for its recent slowdown on President Donald Trump, who has tangled with China over trade. Despite Trump’s pledge to bring back manufacturing jobs, the sector is now in recession, she wrote, and wages for the industry lag the national average. “The country’s economic foundation is fragile. A single shock could bring it all down. And the Trump Administration’s reckless behavior is increasing the odds of just such a shock,” Warren wrote.
Morgan Stanley sees ‘credible bear case’ for a US recession
Interest rate cuts might come too late to save an economy that is dangerously close to slipping into recession, according to Morgan Stanley economists. “For now, the path to the bear case of a U.S. recession is still narrow, but not unrealistic,” a team led by the firm’s chief U.S. economist, Ellen Zentner, told Morgan Stanley clients in a lengthy analysis that spells out the likelihood of negative growth within the next 12 months and what investors should do if that comes to pass. Trade tensions that could lead to layoffs and a pullback from consumers are at the center of the recession case. Zentner said the current “credible bear case” probability is about 20%, but that could change quickly. “If trade tensions escalate further, our economists see the direct impact of tariffs interacting with the indirect effects of tighter financial conditions and other spillovers, potentially leading consumers to retrench,” she wrote. “Corporates may start laying off workers and cutting capex as margins are hit further and uncertainty rises.”
Retailers should thank Amazon: Adobe estimates the size of a Prime Day bump
Amazon’s Prime Day is fueling other retailers’ online sales, an early reading shows. On Monday, the first day of Amazon’s 48-hour shopping extravaganza this year, retailers that make more than $1 billion in annual revenues saw a 64% increase in their digital sales compared with an average Monday, according to Adobe Analytics. That’s better than a 54% spike last year, said Adobe, which measures transactions at 80 of the top 100 internet retailers in the U.S. Niche retailers, which Adobe classifies as those that bring in less than $5 million in annual sales, saw a 30% increase in online sales on Monday, according to the firm. Adobe said Amazon’s Prime Day is now the third period outside of the holiday season during which online sales in the U.S. will top $2 billion, like they did on Labor Day last year and Memorial Day this year. Amazon’s Prime Day kicked off at 3 a.m. ET on Monday and runs for 48 hours, the longest in the event’s history. Last year, Prime Day lasted 36 hours. Other retailers including Walmart, Target, eBay, Macy’s and Best Buy have been touting deals this week to compete. Target is pushing discounts for its in-house home goods brands. Walmart is expected to run deals, on everything from Google Home smart speakers to Instant Pots, through Wednesday this week. More than 250 retailers altogether are expected to have sales going on to try to take advantage of the surge of web traffic around Prime Day, according to RetailMeNot, which tracks coupons online. To be sure, it’s unclear if shoppers are actually buying more around Prime Day through impulse purchases, or if they’re just buying things now that they would’ve normally purchased later in the year. If the latter is the case, the week could end up only stealing sales from the back-to-school and holiday shopping seasons. A study from Deloitte already shows back-to-school spending is expected to be about flat with last year, as more consumers are feeling price sensitive. Amazon also said that its sellers worldwide on Monday had the biggest 24-hour sales day in the company’s history, with millions of Alexa-enabled devices already sold. Amazon shares are up more than 34% this year, bringing its market cap to more than $995 billion.
Recession fears rise for middle-class families
The average family doesn’t feel as good today as yesterday. Middle-class Americans are less optimistic about their economic prospects than they were just six months ago, according to a new report from CUNA Mutual Group. Although the majority of those polled said they feel relatively stable overall, they graded their chances of achieving the American dream as a “C,” down from a “B-minus” in the fall, the insurance provider found. Close to half were increasingly concerned about an upcoming recession. A separate report by Allianz Life found that 48% said they fear a major recession, up from 46% in the first quarter of 2019 and 44% one year ago. “Americans keep hearing that this is the longest economic expansion in history,” said Steven Rick, CUNA Mutual’s chief economist. “People’s expectations are that we are due” for a recession. CUNA Mutual Group surveyed more than 1,200 adults with an annual income between $35,000 and $100,000 in May. Allianz Life polled more than 1,000 adults in the same month.
US retail sales beat expectations in June
U.S. retail sales increased more than expected in June, pointing to strong consumer spending, which could help to blunt some of the hit on the economy from weak business investment. The Commerce Department said on Tuesday retail sales rose 0.4% last month as households stepped up purchases of motor vehicles and a variety of other goods. Data for May was revised slightly down to show retail sales increasing 0.4%, instead of increasing 0.5% as previously reported. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast retail sales edging up 0.1% in June. Compared to June last year, retail sales advanced 3.4%. Excluding automobiles, gasoline, building materials and food services, retail sales jumped 0.7% last month after an upwardly revised 0.6% increase in May. These so-called core retail sales, which correspond most closely with the consumer spending component of gross domestic product, were previously reported to have increased 0.4% in May. June’s strong gain in core retail sales, coming on the heels of solid increases in April and May, suggested a sharp acceleration in consumer spending in the second quarter. Consumer spending grew at its slowest pace in a year in the first quarter. Spending is being supported by a tight labor market, even as the broader economy is slowing as weaker business investment, an inventory overhang, a trade war between the United States and China, and softening global growth pressure the manufacturing sector. The data probably will have little impact on market expectations that the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates this month for the first time in a decade. But signs of strong consumer spending and rising core inflation suggest the U.S. central bank is unlikely to cut rates by 50 basis points at its July 30-31 policy meeting as markets had initially anticipated. Fed Chairman Jerome Powell last week told lawmakers the central bank would “act as appropriate” to protect the economy against risks stoked by a trade war between the United States and China, as well as slowing global growth. The Atlanta Fed is forecasting GDP increased at a 1.4% annualized rate in the second quarter. The economy grew at a 3.1% pace in the January-March quarter. The government will publish its snapshot of second-quarter GDP next Friday. The economy is losing speed in part as last year’s stimulus from massive tax cuts and more government spending fades. Auto sales increased 0.7% in June after a similar gain in May. Receipts at service stations fell 2.8%, reflecting cheaper gasoline. Sales at building material stores rebounded 0.5% after dropping 1.5% in May. Receipts at clothing stores rose 0.5%. Online and mail-order retail sales climbed 1.7%, matching May’s increase. Receipts at furniture stores advanced 0.5%. Sales at restaurants and bars surged 0.9%. Spending at hobby, musical instrument and book stores was unchanged.
NY Fed ‘Empire State’ factory index posts biggest gain in more than 2 years
The New York Federal Reserve said on Monday its gauge of manufacturing growth in New York state recorded its biggest increase in more than two years in July, returning to positive territory to suggest regional activity was expanding again. The index’s increase reversed the prior month’s record 26 point drop that had stoked concerns about a sudden contraction in business activity across New York state. “Manufacturing firms in New York State reported that business activity grew modestly in July,” the New York Fed said of the latest figures. U.S. business sentiment has been bogged down by trade tensions between the United States and its major trading partners. Some of those concerns have been offset by hopes the Federal Reserve would lower short-term interest costs to boost borrowing and demand. The regional Fed’s “Empire State” index on current business conditions jumped to 4.3 points this month from -8.6 in June, which had been the first negative reading since October 2016. For July, analysts polled by Reuters had forecast a reading of 2.0. A reading above zero suggests an expansion in regional business activity. Details in the latest “Empire” report were mixed. The new orders index rose to -1.5 from -12.0, which had been a three-year low. The six-month outlook measure climbed to 30.8 from 25.7 the month before. On the other hand, the employment gauge fell deeper into negative territory to -9.6 in July, which was the lowest since January 2016. The index on prices paid slipped to 25.5 from 27.8, while the gauge on prices received ticked down to 5.8 from 6.8. “On net, a decent but somewhat mixed report that confirms economic activity is not collapsing,” Jon Hill, U.S. rates strategist at BMO Capital Markets, wrote in a research note.
Treasury could run out of cash in early September, urges Congress to raise debt ceiling before recess
The Treasury Department said it could run out of cash in two months, asking Congress to increase the debt ceiling before lawmakers leave for a six-week recess. “Based on updated projections, there is a scenario in which we run out of cash in early September, before Congress reconvenes,” Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said in a letter to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on Friday. “As such, I request that Congress increase the debt ceiling before Congress leaves for summer recess,” Mnuchin said. Lawmakers and the Trump administration are rushing to pass a spending deal and raise the U.S. borrowing limit to avoid another government shutdown. Mnuchin previously said the White House will offer a one-year continuing resolution and debt ceiling increase if the two sides cannot strike a deal. Funding for the current fiscal year runs out Sept. 30. The government partially shut down for a record 35 days in December and January after funding lapsed. Here’s the full letter from the Treasury Department to Congress: Dear Madam Speaker: Since there is a reasonable uncertainty in projecting government cash flows, it is impossible to identify precisely how long extraordinary measures will last. We model various scenarios for our cash projections. Based on updated projections, there is a scenario in which we run out of cash in early September, before Congress reconvenes. As such, I request that Congress increase the debt ceiling before Congress leaves for summer recess. Sincerely, Steven T. Mnuchin
US producer prices rose slightly in June, while the cost of goods declined
U.S. producer prices rose slightly in June as the cost of energy and other goods fell for a second straight month, offsetting an acceleration in services, leading to the smallest annual increase in producer inflation in nearly 2-1/2 years. The Labor Department said on Friday its producer price index for final demand edged up 0.1% last month after a similar gain in May. In the 12 months through June, the PPI rose 1.7%, the smallest gain since January 2017, slowing further from a 1.8% increase in May. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast the PPI unchanged in June and increasing 1.6% on a year-on-year basis. Underlying producer prices slowed last month, a sign that overall inflation could remain moderate despite strong gains in prices of most consumer goods and services in June. Excluding the volatile food, energy and trade services components, producer prices were unchanged in June after rising 0.4% for two straight months. The so-called core PPI increased 2.1% in the 12 months through June after advancing 2.3% in May. Low inflation and growing risks to the economy from a trade war between the United States and China, and slowing global growth are likely to see the Federal Reserve cutting interest rates this month for the first time in a decade. Fed Chairman Jerome Powell on Wednesday told lawmakers the U.S. central bank would “act as appropriate” to protect the economy against these risks. The Fed, which has a 2% inflation target, tracks the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index for monetary policy. The core PCE price index increased 1.6% year-on-year in May and has undershot its target this year. In June, wholesale energy prices fell 3.1% after slipping 1.0% in the prior month. Goods prices decreased 0.4% last month after declining 0.2% in May. A 5.0% drop in gasoline prices accounted for nearly 60% of the decline in the cost of goods last month. Wholesale food prices rebounded 0.6% in June. Core goods prices were unchanged for three straight months. The cost of services increased 0.4% in June, the most since October 2018, after rising 0.3% in May. Services were boosted by an increase in margins received by wholesalers and retailers. The cost of healthcare services rose 0.2% last month, matching May’s gain. Those healthcare costs feed into the core PCE price index.
A giant manufacturer just gave a glimpse into this earnings season as it tanks on tariff costs
For those who don’t see the trade war with China hurting U.S. business, a big industrial with a $17 billion market value just sounded the alarm on tariffs costs and related inflation. The Minnesota-based Fastenal, the largest fastener distributor in North America, reported worse-than-expected second-quarter earnings and revenue on Thursday. The company also particularly noted the damage the trade war has done to its business and the difficulty of countering the losses.
US core inflation posts biggest gain in nearly 1 1/2 years
U.S. underlying consumer prices increased by the most in nearly 1-1/2 years in June amid solid gains in the costs of a range of goods and services, but will probably not change expectations the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates this month. The Labor Department said on Thursday its consumer price index excluding the volatile food and energy components rose 0.3% last month. That as the largest increase since January 2018 and followed four straight monthly gains of 0.1%. The so-called core CPI was boosted by strong increases in the prices for apparel, used cars and trucks, as well as household furnishings. There were also increases in the cost of healthcare and rents. In the 12 months through June, the core CPI climbed 2.1% after advancing 2.0% in May. The overall CPI edged up 0.1% last month, held back by cheaper gasoline and food prices. The CPI rose 0.1% in May. It increased 1.6% year-on-year in June after rising 1.8% in May. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast the CPI unchanged in June and rising 1.6% year-on-year. The Fed, which has a 2% inflation target, tracks the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index for monetary policy. The core PCE price index increased 1.5 percent year-on-year in May and has undershot its target this year.
US weekly jobless claims fall to 3-month low
The number of Americans filing applications for unemployment benefits dropped to a three-month low last week, suggesting sustained labor market strength that could help support a slowing economy. Initial claims for state unemployment benefits declined 13,000 to a seasonally adjusted 209,000 for the week ended July 6, the lowest level since April, the Labor Department said on Thursday. Data for the prior week was revised to show 1,000 more applications received than previously reported. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast claims rising to 223,000 in the latest week. The four-week moving average of initial claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 3,250 to 219,250 last week. The Labor Department said no claims were estimated last week. The claims data is entering a period of volatility as auto manufacturers temporarily shut down assembly plants for summer retooling. Companies carry out the plant closures at different times, which can throw off the model the government uses to strip out seasonal fluctuations from the data. There is still no sign of an increase in layoffs related to a trade war between the United States and China, which has helped to dim the economy’s outlook and raise expectations for an interest rate cut this month, the first in a decade. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell told lawmakers on Wednesday that the U.S. central bank would “act as appropriate” to protect the economy from the trade tensions and slowing global growth. Fed officials are scheduled to meet on July 30-31. The economy is also slowing as last year’s massive stimulus from tax cuts and more government spending fades. Manufacturing is struggling, the trade deficit is widening again, consumer spending is rising moderately and the housing sector remains mired in a soft patch. Despite the rising risks to the 10-year old economic expansion, the longest in history, the labor market remains healthy. The economy created 224,000 job in June. While the unemployment rate ticked up one-tenth of a percentage point to 3.7%, that was because more people entered the labor market, a sign of confidence in their employment prospects. Thursday’s claims report also showed the number of people receiving benefits after an initial week of aid increased 27,000 to 1.72 million for the week ended June 29, the highest level since March. The four-week moving average of the so-called continuing claims rose 5,750 to 1.69 million.
Trump’s latest Fed moves are another step in trying to take control of interest rates
The market and the Federal Reserve are currently far apart when it comes to expectations of where rates are headed. Two candidates who President Donald Trump said he is going to nominate to the central bank could bring them closer together. In a tweet Tuesday, the president said he plans on sending the names of Christopher Waller and Judy Shelton to the Senate as Fed governor appointees. Shelton was no surprise — Trump already has named her to a government post and previously indicated he’s interested in her for the Fed job. Waller is a bit more of a cipher. As head of research at the St. Louis Fed, he’s maintained a low-key presence that makes it a bit more difficult to know where he’d try to take the broader central bank. Taken together, though, they represent advancement of a key Trump belief, namely that the Fed needs to be a more complicit partner in pushing the economic expansion higher, and should be doing so through lower interest rates and looser policy overall.
Jobs report could show a slowing trend and be the lever the Fed needs to cut rates
Ten years into the recovery, the economy’s ability to create new jobs may be slowing, both because the U.S. is running out of workers and because the trade war may be worrying employers. Economists expect to see 165,000 jobs were added in June, after a stunningly low 75,000 payrolls added in May, according to Dow Jones. But a soft ADP report Wednesday, with just 102,000 new private payrolls, dampened expectations for the government’s June payroll report, which will be released Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET. The jobs report is also seen as a major input for the Fed to consider when it meets at the end of the month, and if there is more weakness than expected in job growth or wages data, it could be another catalyst for an expected interest rate cut. In the June report, the unemployment rate is expected to hold steady at 3.6%, while average hourly wages are expected to increase by 0.3%, or 3.2% year over year, up from 3.1% in May. “We’ve known for a while with a very low unemployment rate that we’re running out of workers. Payroll gains are going to slow at some point. I don’t know if this is the point or not. I don’t trust the ADP number. I don’t know if the day of seeing 200,000 job numbers is over,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank. ADP is not seen as a strong indicator for the government’s employment report, but in May, its initial report of just 27,000, later revised to 40,000 jobs, sent a strong message about a hiring slowdown that later showed up in the government’s weak May report. On the other hand, some employment indicators remain strong. Weekly jobless claims data, viewed as the most current data on the labor market, fell by 8,000 to 221,000 in late June, signaling a solid enough jobs picture when it was released Wednesday. But ADP’s data also contained some worrisome details, such as the decline of 37,000 jobs in companies employing one to 19 people. “The thing that’s really puzzling is the slowdown in small business hiring. That’s really the engine for job growth in the economy. Seeing that slowdown is concerning,” said Tom Simons, money market economist at Jefferies. So far, it’s not clear how much employers are holding off on hires because they are fearful about an economic slowdown or because of uncertainty about trade or tariffs. But other data, showing slower manufacturing activity and weaker investment spending, has been a concern. “Certainly, it would be a problem if jobs were weak for a second month in a row. For the Federal Reserve, they’re certainly worried and teed up to cut rates on July 31. Any weakness in payrolls for a second month would be a virtual green light for a Fed rate cut,” said Rupkey. “It’s not going to be shocking for the market. ... But is the economy really ready to go into a tailspin with an actual downturn here? It just doesn’t feel like it. Consumer spending is still high.” But the average hourly wage number inside Friday’s report could also be a factor for the Fed, especially if it’s shy of expectations. “Expectations are for a deceleration in job growth. Job growth is decelerating quite sharply from 2018. The real issue for the Fed is what’s wage growth, and it’s not been promising of late,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at Grant Thornton. “We’ve seen 3.1% after hitting a peak of 3.4%. If we stay in that 3% range, that’s enough for the doves at the Fed to go. The question is can they bring the hawks along with them. They’re really going to be looking at the wage number.” Moody’s Analytics chief economist Mark Zandi said he expects 135,000 jobs were added in June and that the report will show both a lack of workers and the impact of trade wars and tariffs on the economy. The ADP report is published in collaboration with Moody’s. Zandi said the ADP report reflects just private sector hires, and he expects a surge in government workers in June. “I think the trade war is causing real damage. We were going to see some slowdown anyway because we were not going to be able to fill these open positions. This feels like it’s more than that. We went from a monthly gain of 225,000 last year to 165,000, and the recent numbers suggest we could be at 125,000 to 150,000. That’s more than can be explained than that people can’t find workers,” said Zandi. At J.P. Morgan, economists are expecting a below-consensus 140,000 jobs in June. “We are watching the different labor market reports for information about how the job market is responding to recent news on trade policy and other economic developments. While there have been occasional worrisome readings, overall it looks like the trend in job growth is cooling, but not in an especially severe way. We continue to forecast that Friday’s BLS report will show nonfarm job growth of 140,000 in June,” wrote economist Daniel Silver.
Job creation has another rough month in June as private payrolls rise by just 102,000
Job creation looks to have had another rough month in June, with private companies adding just 102,000 new positions, according to a report Wednesday from ADP and Moody’s Analytics. That missed even the meager 135,000 estimate from economists surveyed by Dow Jones and comes off the weak May growth of just 41,000. The May number was revised up from an initially reported 27,000. The disappointment sets the stage for another possible letdown from the more widely watched nonfarm payrolls report from the Labor Department, which will be released Friday and is expected to show growth of 165,000 after May’s lackluster 75,000. “The economy’s growth rate is significantly slowing, and I think the risks are rising that it’s going to stall out,” Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, told CNBC. “I think the economy is on the razor’s edge, and this number is consistent with that view.” Economic data overall has been wobbly lately as economists see growth slowing in 2019 and a possible recession ahead in 2020. “The job market continues to throttle back,” Zandi said in a statement. “Job growth has slowed sharply in recent months, as businesses have turned more cautious in their hiring. Small businesses are the most nervous, especially in the construction sector and at bricks-and-mortar retailers.”
This is now the longest US economic expansion in history
This month marks the 121st month of the economic expansion arising out of the great financial crisis, making it the longest run on record going back to 1854. This cycle, starting in June 2009, breaks the record of 120 months of economic growth from March 1991 to March 2001, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Perhaps because of the overhang of the housing crisis, this run has been weaker than past expansions in total. The cumulative total of quarterly GDP growth figures equals 25%, far lower than previous booms. While the unemployment rate has dropped from a peak of 10% in October 2009 to 3.6% in May, the lowest since 1969, job growth has been relatively slower than during other postwar recoveries. But despite some internal weakness, this expansion keeps trucking along, getting its latest boost from the Trump tax cut of 2018 along with a relaxation in business regulations, according to economists. However, it now appears to need some help if it’s going to continue to rewrite the record books. The Atlanta Fed’s closely watched GDPNow tracker is pointing to just a 1.5% gain for the economy in the second quarter after a strong gain of 3.2% in the first quarter. The CNBC’s Rapid Update survey puts the GDP tracking estimate at 1.8%. All eyes will be on the jobs report on Friday for the state of the economy. Economists expect that 158,000 jobs were created in June, up sharply from the disappointing 75,000 in May, according to Refinitiv. The unemployment rate is expected to remain unchanged at 3.6%. Wall Street seems to be divided on whether this expansion is going to last. Some believe the Federal Reserve will save the day through cutting interest rates, while some think additional stimulus cannot combat the looming downturn or that the Fed won’t be aggressive enough to stave it off. “We still do not see a recession, but we continue to worry more about downside risks than upside risks to the outlook,” said Torsten Slok, Deutsche Bank’s chief economist, in an email. “To counter the ongoing slowdown in the data and the uncertainty of how much longer the trade war will continue, we see the Fed cutting rates in July, September, and December.” The corporate earnings picture certainly doesn’t look promising. Now 77% of companies issuing pre-announcements say their profits will be worse than Wall Street estimates, which marks the second-worst quarter on record going back to 2006. — CNBC’s John Schoen contributed reporting.
‘Dr. Doom’ economist Nouriel Roubini sees trade war tipping global economy into a recession
The rivalry between the U.S. and China could be so disruptive that it’s starting to decouple the global economy and could eventually cause a recession, according to Nouriel Roubini, the economist famously called the housing bubble. “The consequences of this trade and tech war and cold war [are] the beginning of de-globalizaion ... and the decoupling of the global economy. We’ll have to redo the global tech supply chain. And eventually by next year, if this escalates, it will be a global recession,” said the head of Roubini Macro Associates in an interview with Bloomberg TV on Tuesday.
This Fourth of July, Americans will shell out $1 billion on beer
Americans know how to celebrate. On this year’s 243rd anniversary of the adoption of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, American adults will spend about $1 billion on beer alone – that’s roughly the same amount that is spent on fireworks, the majority of which are imported from China. In fact, the Fourth of July is one of the country’s top drinking holidays, with roughly $1.6 billion spent together on beer and wine, according to a report by WalletHub. More from Personal Finance: One-third of Americans have cut their spending this year Men spend more on impulse buys than women These summer jobs pay almost twice what the average American worker earns Yet more still is shelled out on food for the grill. In total, Americans will spend $6.7 billion on hot dogs, hamburgers and other picnic provisions, according to a separate report by the National Retail Federation, down from $6.94 billion last year. (Americans are expected to eat 150 million hot dogs just on July 4, according to the National Hot Dog and Sausage Council.) Aside from food and drinks, U.S. flags are another hot commodity this holiday, with more than $5 million worth of the Stars and Stripes imported into the country, also mostly from China. All in, that comes out to about $73 per person, the NRF found, a number that has declined slightly in recent years. Still, patriotism is running high, with 86% of the population planning to celebrate Independence Day this year, primarily by hosting or attending cookouts, barbecues and picnics, the NRF found. To join forces with friends and loved ones, 41.4 million people are expected to hit the roads. The NRF polled 7,553 adults between June 2 and June 12, 2019.
Here’s what every major Wall Street bank believes will happen at the Trump-Xi trade meeting
The countdown is on to this weekend’s G-20 showdown between President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping. Reports surfaced on Thursday that Xi was prepared to present terms of an agreement but that China wanted a deal with “balance.” If Wall Street strategists are to be believed, though, the summit may not amount to much. While most agree that a cease-fire is the more likely outcome, at issue is whether Trump will delay imposing more tariffs. “With both sides expressing a desire to resume talks, we see increasing chances of some sort of ‘ceasefire,’ in which the two sides will agree to halt further escalation of tariffs and/or non-tariff barriers while high-level negotiations take place,” Barclays said. “The cease-fire could include a commitment to not escalate trade and technology/investment-related tensions further, with the main structural issues being left unresolved,” Citi said. “Still, the China-containment strategy would likely follow, and the damage on the real economy from the tariffs-limbo is ongoing.” Wall Street has been on a tear in June, and that might actually hinder the ability of the two sides to move closer to a deal, according to Bank of America. “We think it will be difficult to bridge the gap because the strength of US equity markets and the Fed’s dovish turn have greatly reduced the pressure on the US to compromise,” BofA said. The Dow is on pace for its best June since 1938 when it gained 24.26% while the S&P is on pace for its best June since 1955 when it gained 8.23%. Here’s what the major Wall Street strategists are saying:
What you need to know about Saturday’s highly anticipated Trump-Xi meeting
U.S. President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping are poised to write the latest chapter in their globe-shaking trade war when they meet Saturday morning in Japan. The leaders of the world’s two largest economies are set to discuss a range of issues when they face off around 11:30 a.m. local time in a bilateral event during the G-20 summit in Osaka. Trade, however, will be at the top of the agenda. Not only will their highly anticipated discussion likely set the near-term tone for the U.S.-China relationship, but it may also have significant ramifications for the global economy. “Clearly, the most suspenseful meeting in terms of the impact on markets and the global economy is going to be President Trump’s meeting with President Xi,” said Michael Hirson, practice head of China and North East Asia at political consultancy firm Eurasia Group. Many experts expect that the two leaders are likely to agree to a temporary pause in any trade war escalation, but Trump himself has suggested he may be looking to levy new tariffs on China if he doesn’t like what he hears from Xi. On the other hand, there have been sporadic hopes that Saturday’s meeting could result in some sort of long-term deal. Hirson told CNBC on Friday that a truce is likely, but a concrete trade deal is more of a stretch.
JP Morgan, Goldman and others boost dividends and buybacks after passing Fed stress test
Big U.S. banks are showering investors with fatter dividends and share repurchases after passing the Federal Reserve’s annual stress tests. Goldman Sachs boosted its quarterly dividend by nearly 50% to $1.25 a share, from 85 cents a share, and authorized a $7 billion stock repurchase program, up from $5 billion a year ago. The bank’s shares rose 2.2% in the premarket Friday. J.P. Morgan Chase lifted its dividend by 13% to 90 cents a share from 80 cents a share. The bank also can repurchase up to $29.4 billion in stock under a new program, compared to $20.7 billion last year. J.P. Morgan shares rose 1.9%. Bank of America increased its dividend to 18 cents a share from 15 cents and can repurchase up to $30.9 billion in stock. Wells Fargo raised its dividend to 51 cents a share from 45 cents and can buy back $23.1 billion in shares. Bank of America’s stock climbed more than 2% while Wells Fargo advanced 1.7%. Citigroup boosted its dividend to 51 cents a share from 45 cents and can repurchase $21.5 billion in stock. Morgan Stanley hiked its dividend to 35 cents a share from 30 cents and can buy back $6 billion in stock. Citigroup shares gained 1.9% while Morgan Stanley advanced 1.8%. All 18 of the big institutions tested by the Fed won approval to boost payouts with the exception of the U.S. division of Credit Suisse, which had weaknesses in its capital planning process, according to the Fed. The new capital plans cover the period from July 1 of this year to June 30 of 2020. Capital One appears to be the only institution that didn’t increase its quarterly dividend, which remains at 40 cents a share. That may be because Capital One reined in its initial capital plan by using a so-called mulligan to stay above the required minimums, according to a senior Fed official.
Mnuchin: ‘We were about 90% of the way’ on China trade deal and there’s a ‘path to complete this’
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told CNBC on Wednesday the U.S. and China were close to a trade deal, and he’s optimistic that progress can be made during weekend talks between President Donald Trump and China’s Xi Jinping. “We were about 90% of the way there [with a deal] and I think there’s a path to complete this,” he told CNBC’s Hadley Gamble in Manama, Bahrain. He said he’s confident Trump and the Chinese president can make progress in stalled trade talks at the Group of 20 meeting. “The message we want to hear is that they want to come back to the table and continue because I think there is a good outcome for their economy and the U.S. economy to get balanced trade and to continue to build on this relationship.” He did not provide any detail on what the final 10% of an agreement might entail, or what the sticking points are to completing a deal.
Weekly mortgage rates fall further, but only refinance applications rise
It’s almost as if falling mortgage rates are becoming hum-drum, at least for homebuyers. Total mortgage application volume increased 1.3% last week from the previous week, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association’s seasonally adjusted index. Volume was 40% higher than a year ago, largely because lower mortgage rates are strengthening the refinance market. Rates have fallen in three of the last four weeks and are now at the lowest level since September 2017. The average contract interest rate for 30-year fixed-rate mortgages with conforming loan balances ($484,350 or less) decreased to 4.06% from 4.14%, with points decreasing to 0.35 from 0.38 (including the origination fee) for loans with a 20% down payment. That is 78 basis points lower than a year earlier. “Markets last week reacted to a more dovish FOMC statement and forecast, with Treasury yields falling after the meeting,” said Joel Kan, MBA’s associate vice president of economic and industry forecasting. “Mortgage rates dropped again for most loan types, which led to an increase in refinance activity, partly driven by a 9% jump in VA applications.” The drop spurred more refinance activity, with those applications rising 3% for the week and a striking 92% annually. As home values continue to rise, more borrowers become eligible to refinance, and so each drop in rates brings out more business for lenders. Mortgage applications to purchase a home, however, fell 1% for the week but were 9% higher than a year earlier. Buyers are less sensitive to weekly rate moves. Existing home sales did move slightly higher in May from April, as rates fell, but they were still lower than a year ago. Buyers continue to face high prices and low supply of affordable homes. “Now at almost the halfway mark of 2019, we have generally seen a stronger purchase market than last year, despite still-tight existing inventory and insufficient new construction,” Kan said. Sales of newly built homes fell unexpectedly sharply in May, despite lower mortgage rates. Affordability appeared to be the culprit, although some blamed the drop in weaker consumer sentiment in the overall economy.
The trade war is weighing on Chinese home buying in the US
Chinese home buyers last year ponied up much less cash in the U.S. as the trade war continues to escalate between the world’s two largest economies. As President Donald Trump and President Xi Jinping prepare to meet this week, there are worries that decline in spending could extend further. U.S. property sales to Chinese buyers saw a 4% drop from 2017 to 2018, according to numbers provided by Juwai.com, China’s largest foreign property sales site. “The worsening trade relationship between China and the US may cause Chinese investors to shift their presence into other key markets,” property consultancy Knight Frank said in a report. It suggested that investment can instead go to major cities in Australia, Japan, and the United Kingdom, according to the firm’s 2019 Wealth Report.
Debt and deficits won’t be as bad as feared but are still dangerous, CBO says
Both the nation’s debt and deficit will grow more slowly than previously forecast, according to new government data, the result of lower interest rates and reduced disaster spending. The Congressional Budget Office estimated Tuesday that the national debt will rise to 141% of the economy over the next 30 years — 11 percentage points lower than the agency projected last year. The primary deficit, or the gross debt minus interest payments, is expected to equal 2.4% of GDP this year, down about 0.3 percentage points from last year’s forecast. By 2048, the primary deficit will hit 3% of GDP, about 0.2 percentage points lower than predicted last year. The agency reduced its forecast following lower than expected spending on emergencies such as wildfires and hurricanes. Projections for Social Security outlays are also slightly below last year’s levels because of a reduction in the number of beneficiaries, the agency said. But one of the main factors holding down the projections are expectations for lower long-term real interest rates, or the nominal level minus inflation. Between 1990 and 2007, the rate on the 10-year Treasury notes averaged 2.9%. In Tuesday’s report, the CBO expected that real rate to hit 1.4% by 2029 and 2.2% in 2049. Despite such low rates, the CBO still warned that the nation’s debt remains on an unsustainable course. “The prospect of such large deficits over many years, and the high rising debt that would result, poses substantial risks for the nation and presents policymakers with significant challenges,” the agency stated.
Consumer confidence drops more than expected, reaching its lowest point in nearly two years
A key measure of the American economy slipped this month after three consecutive months of increases as consumers saw the trade war with China as an increased risk. The Conference Board’s consumer confidence index declined to 121.5 in June, the business research group said on Tuesday. The drop was more than the decline to 131.1 that economists surveyed by Reuters expected. In May, the Conference Board reported a preliminary reading of 134.1 for the index, but revised last month’s number to 131.3 in the latest report. The drop brought the index to its lowest level since September 2017.
New home sales sank 7.8% in May, despite a big drop in mortgage rates
Homebuyers pulled away from the builders in May, even as affordability improved thanks to lower mortgage rates. Sales of newly built homes fell 7.8% from April were 3.7% lower than in May 2018, according to the U.S. Census. This number represents signed contracts, not closings, so it is a very recent indicator of buyers out shopping during the month. The decline in sales came even as home shoppers were watching mortgage rates fall. The average rate on the popular 30-year fixed mortgage started May at 4.29%, according to Mortgage News Daily, and then ended the month at 3.94%, a sizable savings on a monthly payment, especially given higher home prices. “The lower mortgage rates haven’t unleashed a new wave of demand,” said Buck Horne, homebuilding analyst and senior vice-president at Raymond James. Horne pointed to rising competition from the increasing supply of existing homes for sale, especially in the markets where builders are most active. Supply of existing homes for sale is up a striking 85% in Las Vegas annually, 52% in Seattle and 21% in Dallas, according to Horne. Supply in Southern California is also up in double digits. “It’s harder for the builders to compete against resale inventory that is priced significantly below where their asking price is now,” added Horne. The median price of a newly built home sold in May was $308,000, down 2.7% annually. Builders are not necessarily lowering base prices, but they are offering more incentives; the drop in median price is likely due to a shift in the mix of homes selling. The share of homes sold in the $200,000 to $299,999 category increased in May. More buyers on the lower end would shift the median down. “This indicates that builders are responding to strong entry-level demand,” said Danielle Hale, chief economist for Realtor.com, who also pointed to larger issues hitting home sales. “This decline in May is likely attributed to recent concerns about tariffs and other events that could slow global economic growth, and may be a sign that the Fed’s pledge to doing what is necessary to sustain the expansion may require action as soon as next month.” The nation’s largest homebuilder by revenue, Lennar, reported second-quarter earnings Tuesday morning and showed a slight drop in the average selling price. New orders were flat, despite the drop in rates. Its executive chairman, however, expressed optimism. “The well-documented market pause in the second half of 2018 set the stage for more moderate home price increases and lower interest rates, which stimulated both affordability and demand, leading homebuyers back to the market,” said Stuart Miller. The available supply of newly built homes also rose markedly in May to 6.4 months’ worth at the current sales pace. In contrast, the supply of existing homes for sale was at 4.3 months at the end of May. New homes come at a price premium to existing homes, and today’s buyers, especially younger millennials, are finding it hard to afford new construction.
Billionaires to Trump and other 2020 candidates: Please tax us
Some of America’s billionaires have a message for the next president of the United States: Tax us. Nineteen billionaires and ultra millionaires including George Soros, Abigail Disney, Chris Hughes and members of the Pritzker family released a bipartisan letter on Monday asking the 2020 presidential candidates to support a tax on the American families with the largest fortunes. “The next dollar of new tax revenue should come from the most financially fortunate, not from middle-income and lower-income Americans,” the letter said. It was first reported by The New York Times. A tax on America’s wealthiest has been at the forefront of the 2020 election stage. Democratic presidential hopefuls Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders, Pete Buttigieg, Beto O’Rourke and others have come out in support of a tax on the wealthiest Americans. Earlier this year, Warren proposed a tax of 2% on wealth over $50 million and 3% on wealth over $1 billion. The proposal is estimated to generate nearly $3 trillion in tax revenue in the next decade.
Bernie Sanders proposes forgiving the student debt of 45 million Americans
Sen. Bernie Sanders announced a plan on Monday to erase the country’s $1.6 trillion outstanding student loan tab, intensifying the higher education policy debate in the 2020 Democratic presidential primary. The Democratic presidential candidate’s legislation — dubbed “The College for All Act” — will release all 45 million Americans from their student debt and be paid for with a new tax on Wall Street transactions. The proposal goes further than fellow Democratic candidate Elizabeth Warren’s plan, which caps student debt forgiveness at $50,000 and offers no relief to borrowers who earn more than $250,000.
A Fed president explained why he was the lone member who wanted an ‘insurance’ cut this week
St. Louis Fed President James Bullard wanted his fellow central bankers to approve an “insurance” rate cut at this week’s meeting as a guard against weaker growth and low inflation. In a statement Friday, Bullard explained his vote against the Federal Open Market Committee’s decision to leave its benchmark interest rate unchanged. He was the only one of 10 voting committee members to dissent, although documents related to the meeting indicated considerable uncertainty about future policy. Low price pressures and an uncertain outlook with GDP growth “expected to slow” were central to his thinking. He differed with Chairman Jerome Powell’s assessment in May that inflation that has remained below the Fed’s 2% target is the result of “transitory” factors.
US weekly jobless claims fall more than expected
The number of Americans filing applications for unemployment benefits fell more than expected last week, pointing to underlying market strength despite a sharp slowdown in job growth in May. Initial claims for state unemployment benefits dropped 6,000 to a seasonally adjusted 216,000 for the week ended June 15, the Labor Department said on Thursday. Data for the prior week was unrevised. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast claims would decrease to 220,000 in the latest week. The Labor Department said no states were estimated. The drop in claims followed three straight weekly increases. Claims are being closely watched for signs of a rise in layoffs stemming from a recent escalation in trade tensions between the United States and China. The trade war has increased uncertainty over the U.S. economic outlook, prompting the Federal Reserve on Wednesday to signal it could cut interest rates by as much as half a percentage point over the rest of this year. The U.S. central bank kept rates unchanged on Wednesday. Fed Chairman Jerome Powell acknowledged the meager job gains in May and said “in light of recent developments this bears watching,” but also noted that “many labor market indicators remain strong.” The four-week moving average of initial claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, rose 1,000 to 218,750 last week.
How the trade war with China could crush California’s $2.7 trillion economy and hurt other states
Roughly one year into the U.S. trade war with China, importers and exporters are still finding workarounds for the tariffs. But with new tariffs going into effect this month and no end to the battle in sight, experts say it may be only a matter of time before the full impact is felt. The ripple effect will reverberate throughout state economies in a myriad of ways. But it’s California that stands to lose the most, trade experts say. In terms of sheer volume, California conducts more trade with China than any other state in the country. Total trade with China tops $175 billion. That, along with the flow of Chinese investment into the state, can seriously impact California’s GDP growth and crush its $2.7 trillion economy. The latest escalation in the trade war, with some tariffs rising to 25% on June 1, comes as overall economic growth in California begins to cool. The state’s economy grew by 3.5% in 2018. That pace slowed to 2.% in the first quarter of 2019, according to the U.S. Commerce Department. For now, shippers are girding for the fallout. At the Port of Oakland in California, Maritime Director John Driscoll said he was surprised last week when volume of containerized agricultural exports for May came in 8.4% higher than one year ago — the third consecutive monthly increase. “What we feel from talking to customers and talking to users of the port is that they are finding other markets. They’re tapping other things. They’re being creative of where they’re sending their products to other countries,” Driscoll told CNBC. Agricultural exports rose 12% in the first four months of the year, led by increases in shipments to Taiwan, Vietnam, Korea and Japan. Ag exports to China also rose despite the tariffs, but only by 5%. Driscoll believes that in addition to finding alternative markets in Asia, some exporters are still “front-loading” — trying to get shipments in ahead of even steeper tariffs to come. “It very well could be that this is still a residual impact of importers and exporters trying to get in and out before they don’t know what’s going to happen next in the future,” he said. All of which suggests that the increases in volume could be only temporary. “We’re a little bit skeptical to know what’s going to happen in the future, because we’ve seen a lot of front-loading,” Driscoll said. “So the unknown and the uncertainty is if this continues and tariffs impact these volumes in the future, we could see some falling off of our volumes.”
Ron Insana: Trump needs to stop fighting central banks, who are trying to keep the economy afloat
It’s quite ironic that President Donald Trump is criticizing the outgoing head of the European Central Bank for “currency manipulation” when he’s counting on his own central bank head, Jerome Powell, to do the exact same thing. Mario Draghi indicated the ECB could add fresh stimulus to a struggling eurozone economy, a comment that has pushed German interest rates deeper into negative territory and has driven the euro down to $1.11. Draghi, as the Federal Reserve does, has every reason and right to contemplate further stimulus, whether it’s some kind of rate cut, more quantitative easing or other measures that would keep the entire continent from sliding into recession. Despite Trump’s constant calls for the Fed to cut rates, in the absence of any looming inflationary threat, the ECB has a much stronger argument for making a move. Unlike the U.S., the eurozone is tilting toward recession. German manufacturing, the engine of European growth, has stalled. France, Italy and Spain have seen recession-like conditions, while Italy’s heavy debt burden has complicated the outlook across the pond. Also, with the prospects of a so-called No Deal Brexit looming, if the U.K crashes out of the EU, economic troubles could spread from Britain to Berlin. The biggest reason the euro is weakening is not currency manipulation but the fact that the U.S. is still better off than the rest of the world. Positive interest rates in the U.S., in contrast to $12 trillion in negative yielding sovereign debt around the world, is drawing investors into U.S. Treasury bonds, pushing up the value of the dollar. Rates in Germany and Japan aren’t necessarily negative because of central bank intervention — that would be confusing cause and effect. Real rates are negative around the world because the world is not growing. Contrast that to the U.S., where there has been an obvious slowing of economic activity, but the outlook has yet to indicate recession on the immediate horizon. True, with interest rates in the U.S. plunging, a good portion of the Treasury yield curve inverting, consumer spending decelerating for three straight quarters and no end to the trade war with China in sight, it may well be advisable for the Fed to “take back” its December rate cut as early as Wednesday.
A key manufacturing gauge just saw its biggest one-month decline in 18 years
A closely followed gauge of manufacturing in the New York area fell this month to its lowest level in nearly three years. The Empire State Manufacturing Index tumbled to a -8.6 reading from 17.8 in May, a 26.4-point drop that was the biggest slide for a data series that goes back to 2001 and well below Wall Street expectations of 11.5. In all, 22% of respondents reported that conditions had improved since May while 30% said conditions worsened, according to the index, compiled by the New York Federal Reserve and indicating the difference between plans to expand and contract. It was the lowest reading and first negative print since October 2016 and comes amid growing worries about where the broader U.S. economy is heading and what impact the ongoing trade war will have on conditions. Internally, the measure showed sharply diminished business expectations across a number of categories. Net new orders collapsed 22 points to -12 while shipments declined 7 points to 9.7. Employment also looked bleak, falling to -3.5, its first negative print in more than two years. The average work week also declined to -2.2, while the prices paid component was little changed at 27.8. However, the prices received index declined 6 points to 6.8, the fourth month in a row for a decline “pointing to an ongoing deceleration in selling price increases,” the release said. “Bottom line, and I’ll be blunt, this number was terrible. It’s hard not to think this is all about tariffs and what it is doing to business confidence,” Peter Boockvar, chief investment officer at Bleakley Advisory Group, said in a note. “We don’t even need actual tariffs, just the threat of them now on anything and anybody to address issues that have nothing to do with trade also adds a whole new layer of uncertainty.” Businesses also were pessimistic about the road ahead. Respondents to the survey pointed to declining business conditions, with a six-month expectations reading falling 5 points to 25.7. Future orders and shipments fell by a similar amount. Also, the capital expenditures index, a measure of where businesses plan on investing in new equipment and plants, tumbled 16 points to 10.5, while the technology spending index slumped 10 points to 12.8.
Homebuilder sentiment inches lower despite demand for single-family homes
The nation’s homebuilders reported solid confidence in the housing market in June, but levels dropped slightly due to concerns over trade issues, the high costs of construction and the lack of skilled labor. Builder confidence dipped to 64, according to the monthly National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo Housing Market Index (HMI). That’s down from 66 in May and 68 in June 2018. Sentiment has remained in the low 60s for the past five months. Anything above 50 is considered positive. “While demand for single-family homes remains sound, builders continue to report rising development and construction costs, with some additional concerns over trade issues,” said NAHB Chairman Greg Ugalde, a home builder and developer from Torrington, Conn. All of the index’s three components fell slightly. Current sales conditions decreased one point to 71. Buyer traffic dropped one point to 48. Sales expectations over the next six months fell two points to 70. Mortgage rates have been falling since November of last year, and hit the lowest level in two years this month, which would normally signal a buying frenzy. But affordable, entry-level homes just aren’t available. Many builders say they are focused on building more affordable homes, but hurdles exist. “Despite lower mortgage rates, home prices remain somewhat high relative to incomes, which is particularly challenging for entry-level buyers,” said NAHB Chief Economist Robert Dietz. “And while new home sales picked up in March and April, builders continue to grapple with excessive regulations, a shortage of lots and lack of skilled labor that are hurting affordability and depressing supply.” Looking at the three-month moving averages for regional HMI scores, the Northeast posted a three-point gain to 60 and the Midwest was also up three points to 57. The West held steady at 71 and the South fell a single point to 67.
Amazon responds to Ocasio-Cortez’s claim that it pays workers ‘starvation wages’
Amazon responded Monday to a comment by Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., that it pays warehouse workers “starvation wages,” saying in a tweet that it pays workers at least $15 per hour plus full benefits. In response to a question on ABC News’ “This Week” on Sunday about Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, Ocasio-Cortez said whether Bezos is a billionaire is less of a concern to her than how the company’s policies impact Amazon warehouse workers. Ocasio-Cortez said she was concerned that Bezos’ “being a billionaire is predicated on paying people starvation wages and stripping them of their ability to access health care, and also if his ability to be a billionaire is predicated on the fact that his workers are taking food stamps.” Amazon tweeted a response to Ocasio-Cortez’s comments, saying: “Amazon is a leader on pay at $15 min wage + full benefits from day one. We also lobby to raise federal min wage.” Amazon’s head of communications, Jay Carney, later tweeted that Ocasio-Cortez should change the minimum wage law. Ocasio-Cortez was one of the most outspoken public critics of Amazon’s plan to move its second headquarters to Long Island City, in the borough of Queens, before Amazon pulled out. Amazon decided to raise its minimum wage to $15 an hour in 2018 after facing criticism for its pay disparity. In April, Bezos issued a challenge to other retailers to match Amazon’s pay and benefits.
Many Americans say their financial situation is worse since the Great Recession
The Great Recession has officially been over for a decade. For many Americans, there’s little reason to celebrate. Many people’s finances haven’t recovered from the recession’s blows, according to a new survey by personal finance website Bankrate.com. “There are still tens of millions who are struggling to even get back to where they were before the economy took a turn for the worse,” said Mark Hamrick, senior economic analyst at Bankrate.com. More than half of Americans who were adults amid the Great Recession said they endured some type of negative financial impact, Bankrate found. And half of those people say they’re doing worse now than before the crisis.
US retail sales rose in May, while April was revised higher
U.S. retail sales increased in May and sales for the prior month were revised higher, suggesting a pick-up in consumer spending that could ease fears the economy was slowing down sharply in the second quarter. The Commerce Department said on Friday retail sales rose 0.5% last month as households bought more motor vehicles and a variety of other goods. Data for April was revised up to show retail sales gaining 0.3%, instead of dropping 0.2% as previously reported. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast retail sales climbing 0.6% in May. Compared to May last year, retail sales increased 3.2%. Excluding automobiles, gasoline, building materials and food services, retail sales advanced 0.5% last month after an upwardly revised 0.4% rise in April. These so-called core retail sales correspond most closely with the consumer spending component of gross domestic product. They were previously reported to have been unchanged in April. Consumer spending accounts for more than two-thirds of economic activity. The solid gains in core retail sales in April and May suggested consumer spending was gaining speed in the second quarter after braking sharply in the January-March quarter. That could see economists raising their second-quarter GDP growth estimates, which are currently below a 2.0% annualized rate. The economy grew at a 3.1% pace in the January-March quarter after getting a temporary boost from exports and an accumulation of inventory. Exports dropped in April and inventory investment is slowing. In addition, manufacturing production and home sales fell in April. The outlook for consumer spending is mixed. While consumer confidence remains strong, wage growth retreated in May and hiring moderated sharply. Overall, the economy is losing steam as the stimulus from last year’s $1.5 trillion tax cut and increased government spending dissipates. The trade war between the United States and China, which escalated recently, is also hurting the economy. Last month, sales at auto dealerships accelerated 0.7% after dropping 0.5% in April. Receipts at service stations rose 0.3%. Building materials and garden equipment sales edged up 0.1%, while online and mail-order purchases jumped 1.4%. Sales at clothing stores were unchanged and receipts at furniture outlets nudged up 0.1%. Sales at bars and restaurants increased 0.7% last month, while those at hobby, musical instrument and book stores rose 1.1%.
CEO optimism takes a hit in the second quarter as trade headwinds persist
CEOs became less optimistic about the U.S. economy as the Trump administration ratcheted up trade tensions with key partners, according to the latest Business Roundtable survey. The Business Roundtable’s CEO Economic Outlook Index fell by 5.7 points in the second quarter to 89.5. It also marked the fifth straight quarter of declining optimism. Capital expenditure plans, CEO plans for hiring and expectations for sales also fell from the previous quarter. “Business leaders are ready and eager to invest and hire in the United States,” Joshua Bolten, president and CEO of the Business Roundtable, said in a statement. “Yet, the uncertainty over trade policy is making it more difficult for companies to invest and operate confidently.” Trade tensions have been rising since last year as the Trump administration tries to correct what it feels are unfair trade conditions between the U.S. and other countries. Most noticeably, the U.S. has gone after goods from China and Mexico, two key trading partners. Late last month, President Donald Trump threatened to impose a 5% levy on all imports from Mexico that eventually could have escalated to 25%. Trump said last week that the two countries struck a deal to avoid those tariffs that included Mexico curbing immigration into the U.S. But while U.S.-Mexico trade tensions have been quelled for the moment, U.S.-China trade fears remain. The U.S. hiked tariffs on $200 billion worth of Chinese goods in May to 25% from 10%. China retaliated by raising levies on $60 billion worth of U.S. imports. Concerns over tighter trade conditions and their impact on the global economy and corporate profits led to a massive sell-off in May. The S&P 500 plunged more 6% last month. To be sure, the Business Roundtable said the CEO Economic Outlook Index remains above its historical average of 82.6. Hiring and capital investment plans are also above historical levels. The survey was also conducted between May 16 and June 3, which Bolten called “a turbulent few weeks for U.S. trade relations with China and Mexico.” J.P. Morgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon said lawmakers need to “work together to enact policies that will encourage inclusive growth, innovation and opportunity in the United States. That includes investing in infrastructure and workforce training, reforming our immigration system and expanding free and fair trade.” Subscribe to CNBC on YouTube.
‘Tariff Man’ Trump heads to Iowa, a state scarred by his trade war ahead of 2020
President Donald Trump heads to Iowa on Tuesday as he tries to limit the political damage from tariff crossfire that has scarred the U.S. heartland. The Hawkeye State has — at least briefly — exhaled after the White House decided not to ramp up its trade conflict with Mexico, Iowa’s second-largest export market. But ongoing damage in Iowa from the president’s economic war with China has left Trump taking steps to shore up support in the state ahead of his 2020 reelection bid. Trump will tour a renewable energy facility in Iowa on Tuesday afternoon before heading to a state GOP fundraiser. The events follow his administration’s decision late last month to allow year-round sales of E15 fuel, a blend with a higher concentration of ethanol. Higher E15 sales will not only help ethanol producers but also boost demand for Iowa’s corn. Trump will have more he wants to promote in Iowa, a swing state that President Barack Obama won twice before Trump carried it in 2016. On Thursday, he signed a disaster relief bill that will give aid to areas of the state ravaged by flooding. (Trump’s opposition to sending more relief money to Puerto Rico contributed to months of delays for the legislation.) In late May, the Trump administration also announced a plan to distribute $16 billion in aid to farmers damaged by tariffs. “Is the administration concerned about Iowa? I hope they are,” said David Oman, a consultant who was chief of staff to two Republican governors of Iowa and co-chair of the state GOP.
Don’t expect a China deal at G-20, former Trump trade advisor Clete Willems says
A former top trade advisor to President Donald Trump says he thinks the U.S. will emerge from its lengthy negotiations with China with a deal — but it won’t happen at the G-20 summit at the end of this month. “There won’t be a deal at the G-20,” Clete Willems said in an interview Tuesday with Kayla Tausche at CNBC’s Capital Exchange event in Washington. Willems, who was the deputy director of the National Economic Council and who played key negotiating roles in past multilateral summits, said that the high-profile summit in Osaka, Japan, could be the catalyst for closing a deal with Beijing. Trump expects to meet with Chinese President Xi Jinping at that summit, and he told CNBC on Monday that he would slap new tariffs on Chinese goods if Xi does not attend. Willems, whose departure from the Trump administration was announced in March, said he was “bullish” on the prospect of a U.S.-China deal. But he predicted that that deal won’t come in the next month. Subscribe to CNBC’s Capital Exchange newsletter here The G-20, scheduled for June 28-29, could “catalyze a productive period of negotiations where the deal closes,” Willems said. He suggested that looking at a three- or six-month time frame might be more reasonable. The White House did not immediately respond to CNBC’s request for comment on Willems’ remarks. The former advisor’s optimistic outlook on U.S.-China negotiations came as talks between the nations appeared to be at a standstill. The White House earlier this year touted what it said was progress toward a deal with Beijing to address trade deficits and alleged intellectual property theft and forced technology transfers, but negotiations appeared to stall out in May. Trump announced tariffs on $200 billion worth of Chinese imports that same month, and Beijing retaliated by imposing duties on $60 billion worth of U.S. goods. Trump has said he is prepared to slap additional tariffs on $300 billion of Chinese goods. “The China deal is going to work out. You know why? Because of tariffs,” Trump told CNBC. A meeting between the two leaders, while not the final step in negotiations, is “a necessary ingredient at this point,” Willems said. Willems’ remarks echoed those made by Trump’s Commerce secretary, Wilbur Ross, earlier Tuesday on CNBC. “Eventually, this will end in negotiation,” Ross told “Squawk Box.” “Even shooting wars end in negotiations.” But Ross, like Willems, cautioned that a G-20 meeting between Trump and Xi would only lay the groundwork for a possible deal. While both nations appeared to take more aggressive stances last month, Willems said he has seen recent signs of progress from China, such as Xi calling Trump “my friend” last week. “I’ve seen restraint from China, and I’ve seen a rhetorical shift,” Willems said. Willems also said that a deal announced between the U.S. and Mexico on Friday bodes well for negotiations with China. Trump had threatened to impose increasing tariffs on all goods imported from Mexico unless the U.S. neighbor took sufficient steps to address the flow of illegal migrants coming to the two countries’ shared border. Trump canceled those planned tariffs, but vowed to impose them if Mexican lawmakers rejected the deal that negotiators hashed out in Washington last week. “The fact that there was a deal with Mexico makes it more likely that we can get a deal with China,” Willems said.
Stephen Moore argues for a Fed rate cut to boost inflation — then Trump touts low inflation
Conservative economics writer Stephen Moore told CNBC on Tuesday that the Federal Reserve needs to cut interest rates to boost persistently low inflation. “If you do that, I think you will see a nice boom in the economy,” said Moore, who last month under pressure withdrew his name from consideration by President Donald Trump for a nomination to the Federal Reserve Board. “The Fed has to cut rates because prices have been falling and once those prices stabilize you just stop cutting rates,” Moore added in a “Squawk Box ” interview. However, as Moore was talking about the Fed needing to reduce rates to increase inflation, Trump tweeted Tuesday morning that “VERY LOW INFLATION” is a “beautiful thing.” In a response to the president’s tweet, Moore initially laughed, saying that “he’s not supposed to put that up.” Then Moore said, “I agree with him. You’ve got a perfect picture right now: You’ve got very low inflation, low interest rates, the tax cut.” He added, “What’s not to like about this picture?” Trump has repeatedly criticized the Fed for hiking interest rates. Central bankers increased the cost of borrowing money four times last year. Talk in the markets earlier this year about the Fed holding rates steady for a while has turned to calls for a cut or even multiple cuts. The president also tweeted Tuesday morning: “The Euro and other currencies are devalued against the dollar, putting the U.S. at a big disadvantage.” He added the Fed doesn’t have “a clue.”
US underlying producer prices increase solidly in May
U.S. producer prices increased solidly for a second straight month in May, boosted by a surge in the cost of hotel accommodation and gains in a range of other services, pointing to a steady pickup in underlying inflation pressures. The report from the Labor Department on Tuesday likely supports the Federal Reserve’s view that the recent weak inflation readings are probably transitory. Fed policymakers are scheduled to meet on June 18-19 against the backdrop of rising trade tensions, slowing growth and a sharp step-down in hiring in May that have led financial markets to price in at least two interest rate cuts by the end of 2019. Fed Chairman Jerome Powell said last week that the U.S. central bank was closely monitoring the implications of the trade tensions on the economy and would “act as appropriate to sustain the expansion.” A rate cut is, however, not expected next Wednesday. Producer prices excluding food, energy and trade services rose 0.4% last month, matching April’s gain, the government said. The so-called core PPI increased 2.3% in the 12 months through May after rising 2.2% in April. Weaker energy and food prices, however, partially offset the increase in services last month. That led the producer price index for final demand to edge up 0.1% in May after gaining 0.2% in April. In the 12 months through May, the PPI climbed 1.8%, slowing from April’s 2.2% advance. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast the PPI would nudge up 0.1% in May and rise 2.0% on a year-on-year basis. U.S. Treasury yields ticked up and the dollar rose to a session high against a basket of currencies after the release of the data. U.S. stock index futures were trading higher.
Chamber of Commerce hits Trump on ‘weaponization of tariffs’ — and then Trump calls CNBC to fight back
President Donald Trump is right to pressure China to change its protectionist trade and business practices, but he should not be using tariffs to do it, a top official at the world’s largest business lobbying group said Monday. Myron Brilliant, head of international affairs at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, also told CNBC’s “Squawk Box” that Trump should never have used the threat of tariffs to try to force Mexico to crack down on illegal immigration, especially with ratification of the new USMCA, the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, pending in Congress. “The weaponization of tariffs — the increase of threats on our economy, on our farmers, our manufacturers, our consumers — is going to hurt our country. It also creates uncertainty with our trading partners,” said Brilliant, suggesting the Mexico situation might send the wrong message to China that the U.S., even if it makes a trade deal as in the case of the USMCA, may still come back later and hold tariffs over their heads. “The world is watching,” he added. Shortly after Brillant’s interview, Trump called into “Squawk Box” to argue his case for why tariffs are effective. The president also blasted the Chamber of Commerce. Trump told CNBC on Monday that the business group protects corporate America not the American people. The president also said tariffs allow the U.S. to level the playing field, claiming he believes that China will make a deal with the U.S. “because they’re going to have to” due to tariff pressures. “If we didn’t have tariffs we wouldn’t have made a deal with Mexico,” Trump also said, touting the agreement he announced late Friday on the ways Mexico promised to help stop migrants from entering the U.S. illegally across the border that the two countries share in exchange for tariffs not going into effect. WATCH: Trump to CNBC: Tariffs are a beautiful thing when you’re the piggybank
President Trump to CNBC: China is going to make a deal because ‘they’re going to have to’
President Donald Trump told CNBC on Monday he believes China will make a deal with the U.S. “because they’re going to have to.” In a wide-ranging telephone interview on “Squawk Box, ” Trump defended his threats to slap tariffs on Mexico and China, which he said are putting the U.S. “at a tremendous competitive advantage.” “The China deal is going to work out. You know why? Because of tariffs,” Trump told co-host Joe Kernen. “Right now, China is getting absolutely decimated by companies that are leaving China, going to other countries, including our own, because they don’t want to pay the tariffs.” It’s unclear to what extent China is being hurt by U.S. tariffs. Data released by Chinese President Xi Jinping’s government Monday morning show a widening Chinese surplus on U.S. in May. Trump said China is “going to make a deal because they’re going to have to make a deal.”
US wind energy industry is booming, but tariffs pose a threat
In 2008, Jason Urichich was at a crossroads. He lost his home and landscaping business in Youngstown, Ohio, and decided it was time for a change. He decided to pursue a six-month program at Kalamazoo Valley Community College in Michigan for wind turbine repair. “I was really interested in the small turbines, and at home I was trying to build one myself,” Urichich said. “I decided I didn’t know enough about it, and maybe I should go to school for it.” A decade later that “maybe” turned into a career. He’s now a senior lead technician for Avangrid Renewables’ Locust Ridge Wind Farm in Shenandoah, Pennsylvania. The company employs some 300 technicians at its 60 commercial-scale wind facilities across the country. With five more under construction, Avangrid Renewables — which provides clean energy to major companies like Nike and Amazon’s AWS — is hiring dozens more nationwide, as demand continues to grow. The American Wind Energy Association’s U.S. Wind Industry Annual Report found that by the end of 2018, the sector supported 114,000 full-time-equivalent jobs directly associated with wind energy project planning, development, construction, manufacturing, supply chain and operations. Some 8,500 jobs were added in 2018 — an increase of 8%. The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that wind turbine technician jobs will be the second-fastest-growing occupation through 2026, with a growth rate of 96% to more than 11,000 jobs. “Virtually all of our companies are hiring,” said Tom Kiernan, the association’s CEO. “We are looking for folks that want to build a career, because the men and women who are servicing a wind farm — that wind farm will be there for the next 30 years.” The association said more than 99% of these projects are in rural areas like Shenandoah.
In an era of big corporate deals, CNBC’s Top States for Business study reveals who has an edge
What makes some states more competitive than others in the battle for business and jobs? The calculus has never been more complicated than it is now, with an escalating trade war, historic labor shortages, aging infrastructure and a record economic expansion showing signs of stress. Fortunately, America’s Top States for Business in 2019 is back to make sense of it all. Our 13th annual study, coming soon, uses much of the same data that companies big and small consider when deciding where to locate and expand. These days, some of those decisions are capturing the nation’s attention in a big way. Consider Amazon’s $5 billion sweepstakes for its so-called HQ2 project, which drew bids from 238 cities across North America. Or look at Taiwanese electronics manufacturer Foxconn’s less public search for a spot for a major U.S. manufacturing and technology complex. The judgments both companies rendered — and the fallout that followed — speak volumes about what is at stake. Citing factors including abundant talent, infrastructure, and quality of life, Amazon announced in November that it would split the project between Virginia and New York, with a smaller piece going to Tennessee. But the company abruptly pulled out of New York when a faction of community groups and politicians including U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez raised concerns about upheaval in Long Island City, Queens, and about billions in subsidies for a company that has plenty of its own resources. Amazon’s experience in New York — and New York’s experience with Amazon — are proof that these decisions do not occur in a vacuum. Meanwhile, questions are swirling around Foxconn’s promise to build a $10 billion facility in Racine County, Wisconsin. At a White House ceremony in 2017, President Donald Trump, then-Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, and Foxconn Chairman Terry Gou said the project would almost single-handedly revitalize American manufacturing. The company said it had chosen Wisconsin based on its workforce, infrastructure and education system. It also did not hurt that Wisconsin offered Foxconn a rich package including $2.85 billion in direct subsidies, along with other tax breaks and infrastructure improvements bringing the total to more than $4 billion.
Jobs creation slows dramatically with payrolls up just 75,000 in May, much worse than expected
Job creation decelerated strongly in May, with nonfarm payrolls up by just 75,000 even as the unemployment rate remained at a 50-year low, the Labor Department reported Friday. The decline was the second in four months that payrolls increased by less than 100,000 as the labor market continues to show signs of weakening. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones had been looking for a gain of 180,000. In addition to the weak total for May, the previous two months’ reports saw substantial downward revisions. March’s count fell from 189,000 to 153,000 and the April total was taken down to 224,000 from 263,000, for a total reduction of 75,000 jobs. Stock futures fell and bond yields dropped in reaction to the report. Dow Jones Industrial Average futures turned negative before reversing course and turning positive. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to its lowest level since September 2017. “We had expected a slowdown after several years of job gains holding around 200,000, but not this much of a slowdown,” said Beth Ann Bovino, U.S. chief economist for S&P Global Ratings. Broadly speaking, the report amounted to another dark spot amid fears of a larger sputtering in growth and perhaps a recession within the next year. “While much of the attention from investors has been focused on trade disputes and the potential for a slowing economy, today’s disappointing employment report provides further evidence that the end of the business cycle is upon us and economic activity is slowing,” said Charlie Ripley, senior investment strategist for Allianz Investment Management. The unemployment rate remained at 3.6%, in line with forecasts and the lowest since December 1969. A broader measure that encompasses discouraged workers and the underemployed holding part-time jobs for economic reasons, sometimes called the real unemployment rate, fell further, from 7.3% to 7.1%, its lowest reading since December 2000. That decline came to a sharp drop of 299,000 in the part-time for economic reasons category. Among individual groups, the rate for African Americans fell sharply, from 6.7% to 6.2%, while Asian Americans saw a gain from historically low levels, up from 2.2% to 2.5%.
The economy is slowing, but not as bad as Wednesday’s private payrolls report suggests
ADP’s shockingly bad payroll data released on Wednesday may be overstated. Economists say ADP’s monthly report does not always line up with the government jobs report, and so far they have not pared back expectations for Friday’s government nonfarm payrolls data for May. However, some warn that Refinitiv’s consensus forecast for 185,000 jobs could be a bit too high following the soft ADP report. Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, said he expects to see 150,000 new jobs in May, with one possible positive catalyst coming from government hiring of census workers. The ADP report is published in collaboration with Moody’s. Zandi said ADP’s weak May data showing just 27,000 new private-sector jobs could have been skewed by the sharp drop in unemployment claims in April to a 50-year low, which was followed by a quick bounce back. Just as it created an unusual dip in ADP’s May jobs forecast, the fluctuation in weekly claims data drove the ADP April payroll forecast to the high side, at 271,000 jobs. The actual government report in April was 263,000. But Zandi said the overall ADP payrolls number, which is not released, does show a softening in the labor market which was also there last month. Wednesday’s report, however, did raise doubts about the strength of the labor market, as economists are increasingly expecting the Fed to cut interest rates. In the bond market, the 2-year yield, most reflective of Fed policy, slipped as low as 1.75%. Expectations in the futures market for Fed rate cuts went from two this year to nearly three, according to NatWest Markets. “Last month, [ADP] overstated the strength. This month it overstated the weakness. The reality is job growth is slowing, notably slowing, but in the scheme of things, it’s still strong. I would take an average for the two months, and that would be 150,000 on the nose, and that’s where we are — 150,000,” said Zandi. “That’s well below last year’s 225,000, but it’s still above the 100,000 needed to sustain stable employment.” Zandi said President Donald Trump’s trade policy will determine what happens to the labor market, which has been very strong with decades’ low unemployment of 3.6%. “It’s on a razor’s edge. It depends entirely on what the president decides to do with on tariffs,” said Zandi. “If he escalates and follows through with his threats, I think recession is likely. If he calls a truce and we stay where we are, I think the economy will settle in around 100,000 this time next year. If he finds a way back from the tariff war, we have some upside potential.” Michael Gapen, chief U.S. economist at Barclays, sees the ADP report as an anomaly and expects May’s nonfarm payrolls to increase by 175,000. However, Gapen also foresees slowing job growth and a weakening economy, which he expects will force the Fed to cut interest rates by 75 basis point this year. “It feels like a shadow of 2015 and 2016. If goods producing sectors are slowing down, hiring slows as well,” he said. “In 2015, 2016, the services side of the economy was OK.” Earlier Wednesday, ISM nonmanufacturing data showed the services sector economic activity expanded in May, with a reading of 56.9% from 55.5%. Employment also improved in the services sector, growing by 4.4 points to 58.1%. ISM Manufacturing data showed activity declined to 52.1%, the lowest since October, 2016, but manufacturing hiring grew. Gapen said jobless claims, at about 216,000 last week, and other measures were not sending negative signals on the labor market. “ADP underscores an emerging theme and that is that the economy is slowing, and with the threat of additional tariffs, now risks contracting sooner,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at Grant Thornton. “Our forecast is buoyed by the wild card on census hires. Absent a boost from census hires, private payroll growth to slow.” Daniel Silver, U.S. economist at J.P. Morgan Chase, said in a note, that he still expects 160,000 nonfarm payrolls in Friday’s Labor Department report. “But the May [ADP] reading on its own was the weakest monthly change since May 2010 and certainly raises the possibility that the labor market is weakening more than we had anticipated.” 
White House trade advisor Peter Navarro says Trump’s new tariffs ‘may not have to go into effect’ depending on US-Mexico talks
White House trade advisor Peter Navarro said that President Donald Trump’s new tariffs on Mexico “may not have to go into effect,” depending on the outcome of talks between U.S. and Mexican officials. Navarro, a hard-line supporter of Trump’s tariffs, said in a CNN interview that there were “absolutely” concessions Mexico could make at the meetings, scheduled for later Wednesday at the White House, that would stop the tariffs on 5% of all Mexican imports from going into effect Monday. Trump is using the threat of tariffs to force Mexico to stem the flow of undocumented migrants crossing the U.S. border. The White House advisor outlined three specific areas where Mexico could make changes to stop Trump from slapping tariffs on its goods: Mexico should crack down on asylum seekers, Navarro said. Mexico should strengthen its enforcement of its own southern border with Guatemala, he added. And Mexico should put an end to government corruption at immigration checkpoints in the country. “That’s it. That’s what we’re looking for,” Navarro concluded. Trump announced the tariffs on Twitter last week, taking the markets and even politicians in his own party by surprise. The tariffs are currently poised to go into effect Monday, and are set to gradually be hiked to 25% by October. But Navarro said in the interview Wednesday morning that “we believe that these tariffs may not have to go into effect, precisely because we have the Mexicans’ attention.” The “No. 1” issue on Navarro’s list would be for Mexico to “commit to taking all the asylum seekers and then applying Mexican laws, which are much stronger than ours.” “Look, here’s the thing,” he said. “If the people who are moving up with scripts to claim asylum from their narco-trafficker, human-trafficker handlers simply understood that that script ain’t gonna work anymore getting into America,” then the stream of migrants coming up to the southern border to claim asylum “will go to a trickle.” Navarro’s focus on “scripts” appeared to reference the alleged problem of migrants reciting language at the border claiming that they have a credible fear of persecution or harm and therefore are eligible for asylum. It’s unclear how Mexico would address that problem; U.S. asylum officers, meanwhile, have been directed to challenge such claims, according to internal documents reported on in May by The Washington Post. The second concession, he said, would be to get “a strong commitment from the Mexican government to put resources” on its own southern border with Guatemala. Navarro explained that the roughly 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico is “very hard to police,” while the 150-mile Mexico-Guatemala border is not only much narrower and “better yet, it has natural and artificial choke points where it is really easy to police.” The last demand Navarro said the U.S. has for Mexico is to put an end to corruption at checkpoints. “Those checkpoints are designed to stop the flood, but instead it’s ... the corruption, the government officials who make money off this human trafficking,” Navarro said. “That has to stop.” Navarro said his three proposed concessions were already made “very, very clear” by a Trump administration official “the first day” that the tariffs were announced. But acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney had told reporters the day Trump announced the tariffs that “We did not set a specific percentage, did not set a specific number” for Mexico to reduce immigration levels. “It’s a very fluid situation,” Mulvaney said. While Navarro’s remarks Wednesday suggested that there was a distinct possibility of averting the tariffs, Trump himself has made the tariffs sound more like an inevitability. At a news conference Tuesday in London alongside British Prime Minister Theresa May, Trump reaffirmed the new policy “will take effect next week.” In a tweet Sunday, Trump appeared dismissive toward the possibility of making significant progress with Mexico during the talks with White House officials, including Vice President Mike Pence. “Mexico is sending a big delegation to talk about the Border. Problem is, they’ve been “talking” for 25 years,” Trump tweeted. “We want action, not talk.” Meanwhile, a growing number of Republican senators have signaled they oppose Trump’s tariffs. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., for example, said after a GOP lunch discussion about the White House policy that “there is not much support in my conference for tariffs, that’s for sure.” Congress may try and schedule a vote to block the tariffs if Trump uses his emergency powers to impose them. Trump told reporters Wednesday that “Mexico you know wants to make a deal,” referring to the White House talks. “I think they want to do something, they want to make a deal,” Trump said. “We’ll see what happens.”
Job growth screeches to a near halt in May, with private payrolls up just 27,000
Job creation skidded to a near-halt in May in another sign that the U.S. economic momentum is slowing. Companies added just 27,000 new positions during the month, according to a report Wednesday from payroll processing firm ADP and Moody’s Analytics that was well below Dow Jones estimates of 173,000. The reading was the worst since around the time the economic expansion began and the jobs market bottomed in March 2010 with a loss of 113,000. Since then, the private payrolls count has increased by 21.3 million. “Job growth is moderating,” Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, said in a statement. “Labor shortages are impeding job growth, particularly at small companies, and layoffs at brick-and-mortar retailers are hurting.” Indeed, the most damage came at companies with fewer than 50 employees, which reported a loss of 52,000 jobs, and in the goods-producing sector, which saw a decline of 43,000. Almost all of the small business loss (50,000) came at firms with fewer than 20 employees, while the big loser in the goods sector was construction, where 36,000 positions were lost. Large companies withstood the slowdown, adding 68,000 jobs, while those with 50 to 499 employees contributed 11,000. The anemic May growth comes after a powerful surge in April of 271,000, the highest since July though revised down 4,000 from the initial reading. Private job creation in the ADP/Moody’s count has averaged 188,000 a month in 2019. “Following an overly strong April, May marked the smallest gain since the expansion began,” Ahu Yildirmaz, vice president and co-head of the ADP Research Institute, said in a statement. “Large companies continue to remain strong as they are better equipped to compete for labor in a tight labor market.” The disappointing report comes two days before the more closely watched official government reading on nonfarm payrolls. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones expect the Labor Department to report growth of 180,000, down from April’s 263,000, and the unemployment report to hold at a 50-year low of 3.6%. The ADP report occasionally can cause economists to revise their expectations for nonfarm payrolls, though the two numbers can differ widely. Zandi later told CNBC that the May ADP number probably “overstates the case” for a weakening economy and estimated that the nonfarm payrolls report probably would come in around 150,000 based on the average of the past two months’ private payrolls numbers. At a sector level, all the gains came on the services side, which added 71,000 positions. Health care and social assistance grew by 34,000, followed by professional and business services (22,000), and leisure and hospitality (16,000). The “other services” category saw a drop of 9,000, while information lost 3,000 and education decreased by 1,000. All of the major goods producing categories reported losses, with natural resources and mining down 4,000 and manufacturing off by 3,000. Franchise jobs also fell by 4,800. The news comes at a sensitive time for the economy. After a solid 2018 that saw GDP up 2.9% and an unusually strong first-quarter growth rate of 3.1%, economists now expect a slowdown through at least the next two quarters. CNBC’s Rapid Update survey forecasts gains of just 1.7% in the second quarter. Financial markets have slowed considerably after a record-setting pace to start the year. Even with Tuesday’s powerful rally, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has fallen 4.4% in the past month. Markets are betting that the Federal Reserve steps in with at least two and possibly three rate cuts this year. In a speech Tuesday, Fed Chairman Jerome Powell said the central bank is prepared to “act as appropriate” to keep the expansion going, which markets took as an encouraging sign that policy easing could be on the way.
‘Collapsing’ inflation indicators will force the Fed to cut rates as early as this month, Wall Street bull Tony Dwyer says
Market bull Tony Dwyer sees an interest-rate cut coming sooner than much of Wall Street anticipates. According to the Canaccord Genuity chief market strategist, the move could happen as soon as the next Fed meeting, set for June 18-19. “The market is going to force them into it,” he told CNBC’s “Trading Nation ” on Monday. “All the inflation indicators are collapsing. That is telling them they have room to ease.” In a recent note, Dwyer pointed out yields on , and 10-year Treasurys are below the lower bound of the Fed’s target range. On Monday, the 10-year yield sank to a low of 2.06%, its lowest level since September 2017. Dwyer isn’t blaming a fundamental problem with the economy for the yield slump. He believes investors are seeing the fallout from a Fed that became too hawkish and shouldn’t have raised rates at last December’s meeting. “They made two mistakes. They made a communication mistake and they made a policy mistake. They fixed the communication mistake by the dovish pivot which led to that thrust higher off that last December low,” he said. “Now, they have to fix the policy mistake.” At least one Fed policymaker appears to share Dwyer’s sentiment. St. Louis Federal Reserve President James Bullard on Monday became the first Fed official to acknowledge that weak U.S. inflation and global trade tensions may call for a rate cut. “We’ve been saying since January it would probably be some time in the summer,” Dwyer said.
Fed’s Evans: The market is seeing something ‘that I haven’t seen yet’
Chicago Fed President Charles Evans said Tuesday that he is content with current Fed policy though he is worried about persistently low levels of inflation. At a time when markets are anticipating at least two interest rate cuts before the end of 2019, Evans did not commit to any further loosening of policy as the market prices in looser policy and government bond yields sink to multi-year lows. “At face value, it would suggest that the market sees something that I haven’t yet seen in the national data,” Evans told CNBC’s Steve Liesman during a “Squawk Box ” interview from Chicago. He did say that the Fed needs to “defend” its 2 percent inflation target, indicating that if softness persists that could warrant a closer look at policy. “I definitely think that with inflation being a little on the light side, there’s the capacity to adjust policy if that’s necessary,” he said. “But the fundamentals of the economy continue to be solid, the consumer is solid. We have to navigate this, we have to think through what this really means.” Evans spoke at a “Fed Listens” event in his hometown, part of a continuing effort from the central bank to gauge whether it is employing the proper tools to achieve its dual mandate of full employment and price stability. The effort comes a decade after the end of the financial crisis, which the Fed responded to with an unprecedented arsenal of monetary weapons that included cutting its benchmark interest rate to just above zero and employing three rounds of bond buying that took its balance sheet to more than $4.5 trillion. Over the past 3½ years, the central bank has been gradually raising interest rates and reducing the balance sheet size by allowing some proceeds from the bond portfolio to run off each months. However, the efforts to normalize policy have run into a slowing economy and worries that bond yields are pointing to a looming recession. “When I think about our current long-run framework, I think it’s a very good one. I think our dual mandate has served us extremely well,” Evans said. “I think we have to be careful about where the economy is and where we think it’s going.” The tendency of inflation to run persistently below the Fed’s 2% goal has him “a little nervous.” Evans added that he would be “more aggressive” in defending the Fed’s symmetric target, meaning that policymakers would be comfortable with inflation running slightly above or below the goal. “I think we should be overshooting 2%,” he said.
Investors want a Fed rate cut before economy turns: ‘Risk becomes greater the longer you wait’
If the Federal Reserve meets market expectations and cuts interest rates this year, it would be more to assuage flagging confidence than it would be to address any particular ill. After all, most of the signs for the economy remain positive if slowing somewhat. Growth is neither unlikely to keep up with the rapid pace of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019, and it doesn’t look ready to reverse and take the country into recession. But financial markets — not to mention the White House — are demanding a cut, and it’s likely to get at least one before the year ends.
Trump says US will impose 5% tariff on all Mexican imports from June 10
The U.S. will impose a 5% tariff on all Mexican imports from June 10 — and duties of up to 25% will be added in the coming months if Mexico does not take action to “reduce or eliminate the number of illegal aliens” crossing into the U.S., the White House said Thursday. That comes despite U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer on Thursday sending a letter to congressional leaders to kick start the process of approving updates to the North American Free Trade Agreement. U.S. President Donald Trump first announced the Mexico tariffs on Twitter. Mexico was the second-largest importer of goods into the United States in 2018, according to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. The United States imported $346.5 billion of goods from Mexico in 2018, an increase of 10.3% over the year prior, according to the USTR. The 2018 total accounted for 13.6% of overall U.S. imports that year.
Trump may ‘end up torpedoing’ the new NAFTA after threatening Mexico with a costly tariff
The fate of the updated trade deal between the U.S., Mexico and Canada was thrown into question after President Donald Trump threatened to impose a 5% tariff on all Mexican imports starting June 10. Trump said in a White House statement Thursday night that the tariff is meant to address a “border crisis” that has resulted in America being “invaded by hundreds of thousands of people.” He said if Mexico doesn’t halt the flow of those undocumented migrants, the U.S. will progressively raise the overarching tariff to 25% by Oct. 1. Mexico is America’s third-largest goods trading partner. The U.S. exported $265 billion of goods to Mexico in 2018, according to the Office of the United States Trade Representative. John Negroponte, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations during the second Bush administration and now vice chairman of consultancy McLarty Associates, said on CNBC’s “Street Signs” that Trump’s announcement was “ill-timed,” given that the process to ratify the three-country trade deal — the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement — has just kicked off. Negroponte, who also served as U.S. ambassador to Honduras, Mexico, the Philippines and Iraq, said Trump’s announcement put American exporters at “a certain amount of jeopardy.”
Constellation Brands’ stock drops as new tariffs could raise Corona, Modelo import costs
Shares of Constellation Brands dropped 5.8% Friday on the back of President Donald Trump’s threat to slap tariffs on all Mexican imports. The drop was the biggest one-day loss since Jan. 9 for the maker of Mexican beers like Corona and Modelo. On Thursday night, Trump tweeted will impose a 5% tariff on all goods coming from Mexico starting June 10 “until such time as illegal migrants coming through Mexico, and into our Country, STOP.” The White House then said in a statement that levies on Mexican imports would increase up to 25% if immigration issues along the U.S.-Mexico border persisted. Mexico President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador responded to the threat in a letter to Trump, saying: “Social problems cannot be resolved with taxes or coercive measures.” Tariffs on Mexican goods would dent Constellation Brands’ stock and bottom line. According to Morgan Stanley, about 75% of its beer portfolio is “entirely imported” from Mexico. The bank also notes that a 5% tariffs on Mexican goods would shave off nearly 4% from the company’s overall bottom line. A 25% levy, meanwhile, would slash Constellation Brands’ profit by 19%. BMO Capital Markets notes the impact could be bigger. An analyst at the bank estimates Constellation Brands imports 95%-to-98% of its beer from Mexico. —CNBC’s Frank Holland contributed to this report. Subscribe to CNBC on YouTube.
First-quarter economic growth up 3.1%, slightly better than Wall Street expected
The U.S. economy grew by 3.1% to start the year, slightly better than expected and providing some relief at a time when recession fears are accelerating, the Commerce Department reported Thursday. First-quarter gross domestic product beat the 3% Dow Jones estimate but was lower than the initial 3.2% projection from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The decrease came due to downward revisions to nonresidential fixed and private inventory investment, two key drivers to GDP. Get the market reaction here. The new numbers, which represent the second reading, also reflect upward revisions to exports and personal consumption expenditures. Corporate profits also weakened, falling 2.8% across all companies and 0.5% in the S&P 500. Inflation indicators also were weaker than expected, with core personal consumption expenditures up just 1.03%. Exports rose 4.8% amid the increasingly bitter trade war between the U.S. and China, while imports, which are a subtraction from GDP, declined 2.5%. The level of net exports contributed nearly 1 percentage point to the GDP gain.
April pending home sales fall unexpectedly
Home shoppers signed 1.5% fewer contracts to buy existing homes in April compared with March, according to the National Association of Realtors’ Pending Home Sales Index. Sales were 2% lower compared with April 2018, the 16th straight month of annual declines. Pending sales are an indicator of future closings and are therefore the most timely measure of activity in home sales. The expectation had been for a small monthly gain after a large increase in March. “Though the latest monthly figure shows a mild decline in contract signings, mortgage applications and consumer confidence have been steadily rising,” said Lawrence Yun, chief economist of the NAR. “It’s inevitable for sales to turn higher in a few months.” Buyers this spring have had the benefit of lower mortgage rates. The average rate on the 30-year fixed soared above 5% last November, but sank closer to 4% in March and then held steady right around 4.3% for most of April, when these contracts were signed. Buyers are also seeing home prices cool, which carries both negative and positive implications for the market. Prices are still higher than they were a year ago, but the gains have been shrinking with each month. While that helps with affordability, it also fuels fears that, in some markets, a home bought today will actually fall in value over the coming year. This is especially true in overheated markets like Seattle, Denver, Los Angeles and San Francisco, where the supply of homes for sale is rising. “Home price appreciation has been the strongest on the lower-end as inventory conditions have been consistently tight on homes priced under $250,000. Price conditions are soft on the upper-end, especially in high tax states like Connecticut, New York and Illinois,” said Yun. New tax laws have limited the deduction homeowners can take for property taxes. That has hit housing markets in higher tax states disproportionately. As a comparison, there is just a 3.3-month supply of homes for sale priced under $250,000 nationally, but an 8.9-month supply of homes priced $1 million and above. Regionally, the Realtors’ pending home sales index in the Northeast declined 1.8% monthly and was 2.1% below a year ago. In the Midwest, the index rose 1.3% monthly but was 2.4% lower annually. In the South it fell 2.5% monthly and 1.8% annually. In the West it dropped 1.8% monthly and was 1.5% below a year ago.
US weekly jobless claims increase slightly
The number of Americans filing applications for unemployment benefits increased moderately last week, suggesting the labor market remains on solid footing even as the economy is slowing. Initial claims for state unemployment benefits rose 3,000 to a seasonally adjusted 215,000 for the week ended May 25, the Labor Department said on Thursday. Data for the prior week was revised to show 1,000 more applications received than previously reported. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast claims rising to 215,000 in the latest week. The Labor Department said claims for California, Delaware, Kansas, Virginia and Puerto Rico were estimated last week because of Monday’s Memorial Day holiday. The four-week moving average of initial claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 3,750 to 216,750 last week. Continuing strength in labor market conditions is seen supporting growth amid signs that economic activity is slowing after a temporary boost from volatile exports and inventory accumulation in the first quarter. Industrial production, durable goods orders, retail and homes sales all fell in April.
The next downturn could see a ‘radicalization’ of the policies used during the financial crisis
Policymakers pulled out all the stops to fix the financial crisis, but they may have to get even more extreme when the next downturn hits. Future crises could see a “radicalization” of the types of measures taken to jolt the economy out of its last malaise, according to an analysis by AB Bernstein that looks both at the waning effectiveness of current attempts and the shape future efforts will take. Essentially, the view is that next time around policymakers will go even further. That means the use of “Modern Monetary Theory” — in which even more government debt is used to spur growth — along with negative interest rates and the possible step of distributing “helicopter money” or direct cash from central banks like the Federal Reserve. Collectively, the actions are a far more ambitious version of what Bernstein’s experts call the “compulsive stimulus model” that has used debt growth and asset bubbles to drive cyclical growth at a time when the long-term trend for the U.S. economy is below-trend compared to historical norms. “The question ultimately is not if there will be more stimulus (there will be, as the political economy nature of CSM guarantees it), but how desperately will they push for it and how creative will they get,” Philipp Carlsson-Szlezak, chief U.S. economist at AB Bernstein, wrote in the report. “We think the model’s declining effectiveness is an important driver of its likely ‘radicalization’ – a turn towards more extreme versions of stimulus.” Carlsson-Szlezak counters the argument that policymakers are running out of ammunition, though he concedes that the current batch of tools is losing its effectiveness. The policy prescription used when the crisis hit its peak in 2008 included the Fed taking its benchmark interest rate to near-zero and instituting three rounds of quantitative easing, or bond buying that helped create bank reserves. The result was an economic expansion that is only a few weeks short of setting a record for duration, but also one that featured, until recently, mostly subpar growth. At the same time, Wall Street has enjoyed the longest bull market run in history. That model “looks tired overall,” as households are increasingly less inclined to take on excessive debt and low rates lose their effectiveness, Carlsson-Szlezak wrote. “This declining effectiveness is important to consider because it raises the odds that the next time stimulus is called upon it may quickly find traditional approaches lacking and that may lead stimulus to more aggressive means in order to have the same desired effects,” he said. Such efforts could happen either due to an economic downturn or rising populism. MMT, for instance, has emerged not as a way to jump-start the economy but rather as the political left’s method to reduce income inequality. Advocates believe that as long as central banks keep interest rates low, government can keep spending on programs that will bridge the wealth gap.
Jamie Dimon warns US-China trade fight becoming a ‘real issue’ that could deter investment
J.P. Morgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon said that the escalating U.S.-China trade dispute is a “real issue” that could damage corporate confidence. “I think trade is a real issue,” Dimon said Tuesday at a conference in New York. “Trade has gone from being a skirmish to being far more important than that. If this goes south in a bad way, and you have other surprises, that could be part of the thing that changes confidence, changes peoples’ willingness to invest.” Dimon, the longest-tenured CEO among the U.S. megabanks, was answering a question about the risks that could end the current economic expansion. The next recession will probably be caused by a confluence of factors that catch investors off guard, like impacts from the trade war or rising interest rates, he said. While U.S. growth could be in the last legs of its growth, that period could last years, he said. “You’re already starting to see businesses starting to think about moving their supply lines,” Dimon said. “That can obviously slow down business investment and cause uncertainty of all different types.” The U.S.-China trade dispute, which has been simmering for the past year, took a turn for the worse this month after President Donald Trump announced he was boosting tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese goods to 25% from 10%. The news roiled global stock markets as China responded with its own heightened tariffs. Then the U.S. announced restrictions on Chinese telecommunications manufacturer Huawei, effectively banning it from buying parts from American firms. Chinese authorities are weighing whether they will retaliate further against the U.S., and Chinese President Xi Jinping ramped up his rhetoric on the trade war by saying China is embarking on a “new Long March, and we must start all over again!” Dimon also reiterated a warning he has made before: If bad news happens during an actual economic downturn, markets might respond violently. In his mind, the stock meltdown late last year was an example of the markets’ brittle nature. “I’m just telling people, we should be prepared that when we actually have a bad environment, it’ll be that and worse,” he said. “The markets will be worse off than people think and that can cause people to panic a little bit faster than they should.” Separately, Dimon also weighed in on the CEO search currently under way at Wells Fargo. Former CEO Tim Sloan announced in March that he was stepping down immediately, bowing to pressure from regulators and politicians who were frustrated at the pace of change at the bank. “I think Tim Sloan was doing a good job but I think it’s not responsible for a company — this is my own view — to have a CEO leave with no plan in place,” Dimon said. “How can the regulators be pushing something irresponsible? So I don’t know if it was a board-level decision, I don’t know if they felt pressure from whatever, but it’s not the way to run the railroad.” WATCH: Jamie Dimon says trade a real issue for investors
10-year Treasury yield drops to 19-month low as trade fights threaten US growth
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to a 19-month low Tuesday as Wall Street grew more certain that the U.S.-China trade war will last longer and afflict GDP growth more than first thought. At around 3:33 p.m. ET, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note, which moves inversely to price, was lower at around 2.264%, off a 19-month low hit earlier in the session. The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond yield traded at 2.705%, off its lowest level since 2017; the 2.127%. The 3-month Treasury bill yielded 2.356%, keeping a portion of the yield curve inverted. The German 10-year bund yield hit a low of -0.163%, its lowest level since Sept. 30, 2016. The U.S. bond market was closed Monday in observance of Memorial Day.
China denounces US ‘rumors’ and ‘lies’ about Huawei ties to Beijing
China on Friday denounced U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo for fabricating rumors after he said the chief executive of China’s Huawei Technologies was lying about his company’s ties to the Beijing government. The U.S. placed Huawei on a trade blacklist last week, effectively banning U.S. firms from doing business with the world’s largest telecom network gear maker and escalating a trade battle between the world’s two biggest economies. Huawei has repeatedly denied it is controlled by the Chinese government, military or intelligence services. Pompeo, speaking Thursday in an interview on CNBC, also dismissed Huawei CEO Ren Zhengfei’s assertions that his company would never share user secrets, and said he believed more American companies would cut ties with the tech giant.
The world’s largest shipping firm warns of ‘considerable uncertainties’ as trade tensions rise
Danish shipping firm Moller-Maersk posted first-quarter profit close to expectations on Friday, warning that trade tensions and slowing economic growth constitute “considerable uncertainties.” Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) totaled $1.24 billion for the quarter, compared with $1.25 billion forecast by analysts in a Reuters poll. Maersk, the world’s largest container shipping company, said it still expects 2019 EBITDA of about $5 billion. “We are still facing considerable uncertainties,” CEO Søren Skou said in a press release, mentioning “the risk from trade tensions.” In the first quarter, “volumes on trans-Pacific trade between Asia and North America have shown signs of decline and new tariffs can potentially reduce expected growth in global container volumes by up to 1 percentage point.” he added.
The US tariffs on China have been paid almost entirely by US importers: IMF study
U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods are hurting an unintended target as the trade war rages, an International Monetary Fund study found. The study, released Thursday, said that tariff revenue collected from levies on Chinese goods “has been borne almost entirely” by U.S. importers. China and the U.S. have been engaged in a trade war for more than a year. In that time, they have targeted billions of dollars worth of goods with high import tariffs. However, “there was almost no change in the (ex-tariff) border prices of imports from China, and a sharp jump in the post-tariff import prices matching the magnitude of the tariff,” the study said.
Beijing experts’ latest message as trade talks stall: The US needs China
China’s domestic media is rallying the country’s population with messages of standing firm against American “bullying,” while Chinese government-aligned experts are stressing to an overseas audience that the U.S. will need to negotiate. The world’s two largest economies have been locked in a trade fight for more than a year. Both sides appeared to be making progress until early this month, when President Donald Trump accused China of reneging on a deal and raised tariffs on an additional $200 billion in Chinese products to 25%. Beijing retaliated with raising levies on $60 billion worth of U.S. products. Now, there have been no announcements about the next round of talks, and markets await some signal about the future of the trade war that’s roiled stocks over the last year. Throughout this current lull, China’s state-run newspapers and television channels have taken an increasingly anti-American tone. Still, the country’s expert class is emphasizing what the U.S. has to gain from cooperating with Beijing. “In the next 20 to 30 years, the U.S. shouldn’t miss out on this opportunity and lose the China market,” Wei Jianguo, a former vice minister at China’s Ministry of Commerce, told CNBC in an interview Wednesday. He is now vice chairman and deputy executive officer at Beijing-based think tank China Center for International Economic Exchanges.
China says trade talks can’t continue unless US addresses its ‘wrong actions’
The latest U.S. actions on trade are preventing negotiations with Beijing from proceeding, China’s Commerce Ministry said Thursday. “If the U.S. would like to keep on negotiating it should, with sincerity, adjust its wrong actions. Only then can talks continue,” Ministry of Commerce spokesperson Gao Feng said Thursday in Mandarin, according to a CNBC translation. He did not mention any U.S. actions specifically, but it’s been a tense couple of weeks between the world’s two-largest economies. President Donald Trump unexpectedly accused China of reneging on a deal earlier this month and announced that tariffs on $200 billion worth of Chinese goods would increase to 25% from 10% on May 10. Beijing retaliated, raising levies on $60 billion worth of U.S. products. In the last two weeks, the Trump administration also put Chinese telecom giant Huawei on a blacklist that prevents it from buying from American companies without U.S. government permission.
As US plays hardball, China watcher Stephen Roach warns that odds of a trade deal are ‘rapidly receding’
One of Wall Street’s leading experts on China suggests the window is closing on trade deal. Yale University senior fellow Stephen Roach warns that the United States is playing too much hardball. He cites the decision to put restrictions on China telecom giant Huawei as a potentially costly move in the ongoing negotiations. “The odds of a deal are rapidly receding,” he told CNBC’s “Trading Nation ” on Wednesday. “We have to be less hopeful now.” Roach lived in China from 2007 until 2012 while he served as chairman of Morgan Stanley Asia, and he still returns. During his latest trip two months ago, he said the mood was optimistic that reason would prevail and there would be a trade deal. In his latest note, he writes that the U.S.-China conflict is now in a “danger zone” as tit-for-tat tariffs escalate. “China historically has a deep sense of feeling humiliated at the hands of the West dating back to the Opium Wars of the mid-19th century, ” said Roach. ”This is a tough chip on China’s shoulder, and the last thing it wants to do to its leadership is to demonstrate to its constituents is that it’s caving into the West. ” The markets aren’t viewing the trade situation any more positively. The major indexes just saw their third negative session in four, and Thursday’s futures market pointed to a 200-point drop in the Dow. Even if the two sides find a way to end the trade war, Roach doubts it will be a big driver for the stock market. Plus, he believes the battle’s hangover will have a long-lasting effect on corporate America and White House relations with China. “If the relief is focused on just narrowing the trade deficit between the two countries and ducking the tough structural issues, then the markets will enjoy it for a nanosecond. ” Roach said. “Then there will be a much tougher reality ahead.” The White House did not respond to a request for comment.
‘Trumponomics’ co-author Art Laffer: Fed should heed markets and lower interest rates
Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell and his central bank colleagues should take their cues from falling bond yields and lower short-term interest rates, economist Art Laffer told CNBC on Tuesday. “I do think it’s in the cards,” said Laffer, formerly an economic advisor to presidents Donald Trump and Ronald Reagan and known for the Laffer Curve, a theory that argues that increasing tax rates beyond a certain point becomes counterproductive for raising tax revenue. The bond market signals an increasing likelihood of the next Fed move being a reduction in the cost of borrowing money as the year unfolds, jumping to nearly a 70% chance for the central bank’s policy meeting in December. In 2018, the Fed hiked rates four times to a target range of 2.25% to 2.5%. The yield on the 10-year Treasury, trading around 2.43% Tuesday morning, has dropped nearly 10% from the beginning of the year as the even with the recent knock from China trade tensions, has increased about 13% in 2019. “The Fed has always followed interest rates [in the bond market] not led them,” Laffer said in a “Squawk Box” interview. “I think the chance of a lowering is quite high.” Laffer, co-author of the book “Trumponomics: Inside the America First Plan to Revive Our Economy,” said the Fed should not be worried about stoking persistently low inflation by allowing the economy to continue to grow unfettered. “You can have a very strong economy with low interest rates,” said Laffer. Historically, as part of its dual mandate of controlling inflation and maximizing employment, the central bank has used higher interest rates to prevent the economy from overheating. However, Laffer did concede that “inflation is not a simple thing to understand.” He acknowledged that he was “totally wrong” about a decade ago when he predicted inflation was going to pick up due to the Fed’s prolonged easy money policies aimed at boosting economic growth after the 2008 financial crisis. On Friday on CNBC, Laffer’s ‘Trumponomics’ co-author, Stephen Moore, also argued that central bankers should cut rates. Moore, who earlier this month under pressure withdrew his name from consideration by President Donald Trump for a nomination to the Federal Reserve board, also believes the Fed should not be worried about stronger economic growth causing out-of-control inflation. “This is what my whole [Fed] campaign was about — that growth does not cause inflation,” Moore said. At the beginning of May, less than a week after first-quarter gross domestic product showed a 3.2% advance, the Fed voted to hold rates steady. Fed Chairman Jerome Powell, at his post-meeting news conference, appeared to put cold water on a rate cut, calling the factors that drove inflation lower “transient.”
Xi Jinping says China is embarking on a ‘new Long March,’ signaling no end to trade war soon
Chinese President Xi Jinping ramped up his rhetoric yet again on the trade war. “We are here at the starting point of the Long March to remember the time when the Red Army began its journey,” Xi said at a rally in Jiangxi province during a domestic tour. “We are now embarking on a new Long March, and we must start all over again!” according to a report from the South China Morning Post.
Home sales fell in April despite a big drop in mortgage rates
A sizable drop in mortgage interest rates didn’t do much to help home sales in April, as high prices and tight supply at the low end of the market continued to sideline buyers. Sales of existing U.S. homes fell 0.4% in April compared with March to a seasonally adjusted annualized rate of 5.19 million units, according to the National Association of Realtors. Sales were 4.4% lower compared with April 2018. That was the 14th straight month of annual declines. Existing sales make up about 90% of the total sales market, as new construction continues to lag historically normal levels of production. The NAR’s reading counts closed sales, so it reflects buyers out signing contracts in February and March. The average rate on the 30-year fixed dropped sharply in March, so the expectation had been for a gain in sales, but the Realtors’ chief economist said he is not concerned.
Here’s what to do if US-China trade war ignites layoffs
The best time to prepare for being let go is while you’re still punching in at work. While employment overall has been rosy — the unemployment rate went down 20 basis points to 3.6% in April, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics — signs of job cuts are emerging. Last month, U.S.-based businesses indicated that they would trim 40,023 jobs, according to data from Challenger Gray & Christmas. In all, companies announced 230,433 job cuts in the first four months of 2019, up 31% from the year earlier period, the outplacement firm found. More from Personal Finance: Consumer watchdog sues law firm that filed debt collection suits The wealthiest investors are ramping up on this asset Before you cosign a student loan, think of these risks Areas experiencing those losses include the manufacturing and automotive sectors, as well as retail, according to Challenger. Higher tariffs amid a trade war with China increases the pressure. “With retail, you could see prices start to rise and fewer people in the stores,” said John Challenger, CEO of the firm. “That’s going to accelerate retailers into closing stores, moving online and cutting jobs.”
China is in ‘no rush’ to restart trade talks
Beijing is in “no rush” to resume trade talks between the U.S. and China, the according to the South China Morning Post. After CNBC’s Kayla Tausche reported on Friday that trade talks between the U.S. and China have stalled, Chinese analysts said China is prepared to suspend meeting if President Donald Trump wasn’t “prepared to be realistic,” the Chinese newspaper said Saturday.
Three states, including two big ones for the 2020 election, just set new lows for unemployment
At a time when the national unemployment rate is at its lowest in nearly half a century, three states have set all-time records. Vermont’s lowest-in-the-nation 2.2% jobless rate represents a new historic mark for the Green Mountain state, according to a report Friday from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
US recession risk rises as US-China trade tensions heat up: Reuters poll
Over the last month the U.S.-China trade war has boosted the risk of a U.S. recession, say a strong majority of economists polled by Reuters, who now put the chances of that happening in the next two years at 40%. That is up from a median 35% in last month’s poll, the first time it had dipped slightly from where it held since December last year, before a crushing sell-off on Wall Street as 2018 came to a close, in part because of those worries. U.S. President Donald Trump has dismissed the ongoing trade war with China as a “little squabble,” but there are clear signs of the conflict already having an impact on the economy, and the stock market has become jittery again. “I have a hard time thinking of a scenario in which a further escalation of the trade tension we currently have would not make recession risk higher,” said Michael Hanson, head of global macro strategy at TD Securities.
Credit card rates are now at their highest level in history and may weigh on the economy
It costs more than ever to pay with a credit card. Consumers may be spending less as a result, which could be a drag on economic growth. Americans now pay their banks an average 16.9% interest on credit cards — the highest level ever, according to the Federal Reserve. The skyrocketing borrowing rate does not bode well for the economic health of consumers, and therefore U.S. growth. “This is key because of the obvious influence that consumers have on on the overall economy,” said Peter Boockvar, chief investment officer of Bleakley Advisory Group. “The trajectory is is creeping up and is something that we have to watch closely.” With global trade slowing and worries about exports, Boockvar said the U.S. consumer has been a bright spot. Unemployment is at a 50-year lows and wages are rising. But softer-than-expected consumer spending data this week called some of that strength into question. U.S. retail sales fell 0.2% in April, the Commerce Department said Wednesday. Retail sales make up about one-third of consumer spending, which drives most economic activity. Softness in consumer spending briefly spooked stock markets this week, which were already seesawing thanks to trade-war uncertainty. While it’s hard to quantify to what extent, Boockvar said that retail weakness could have been partially due to the high cost of credit. “This is one of the factors that is keeping things in check,” Boockvar said. “Maybe these very high interest costs are overwhelming people’s ability to pay back. It also coincides with a decline in say the savings rate and rising gasoline prices and is something we ought to pay attention to.” The Federal Reserve’s recent rake hikes have caused an increase in borrowing rates across the board, with credit card rates well above other forms of debt. For instance, the average 60-month auto loan rate is around 5.2% and the personal loan rate is about 10.4%, according to the Fed. The Fed’s short-term lending rate is now targeted between 2.25% and 2.5%. However, it has gone up nine times since December 2015 and has triggered increases across the board in consumer debt instruments, due in part because it costs banks more to borrow. Average credit card interest rates since 1994 Boockvar said the main reason for the higher-than-average spike in card rates is because of post-financial crisis regulation. In 2009, Congress passed the Credit Card Accountability, Responsibility, and Disclosure Act. Among other things, it limited the flexibility banks would have to raise interest rates on credit card holders. “The unintended consequence, which there always is when restrictions are placed on the free market, was that banks then started off the credit card rate at a higher level than otherwise,” Boockvar said in a note to clients this week.
US weekly jobless claims fall more than expected
The number of Americans filing applications for unemployment benefits fell more than expected last week, pointing to sustained labor market strength that should underpin the economy as growth slows. Initial claims for state unemployment benefits dropped 16,000 to a seasonally adjusted 212,000 for the week ended May 11, the Labor Department said on Thursday. Data for the prior week was unrevised. Claims had been stuck at higher levels for three straight weeks, reflecting difficulties stripping out seasonal fluctuations from the data around moving holidays like Easter, Passover and school spring breaks. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast claims would fall to 220,000 in the latest week. The Labor Department said no states were estimated last week. The four-week moving average of initial claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, rose 4,750 to 225,000 last week.
Stronger home sales boost builder confidence in May
The nation’s homebuilders are reporting a rebound in sales, and that’s making them more optimistic about the housing market. Builder confidence in the newly built, single-family home market rose 3 points to 66 in May, according to the latest National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo Housing Market Index. That’s the HMI’s highest reading since October, but lower than last May’s level of 70. Anything above 50 is considered positive. “Builders are busy catching up after a wet winter and many characterize sales as solid, driven by improved demand and ongoing low overall supply,” said NAHB Chairman Greg Ugalde, a homebuilder and developer from Torrington, Connecticut. “However, affordability challenges persist and remain a big impediment to stronger sales.” Of the index’s three components, current sales conditions, rose 3 points to 72. Sales expectations in the next six months rose 1 point to 72, and buyer traffic moved up 2 points to 49, the only component still in negative territory. “Mortgage rates are hovering just above 4 percent following a challenging fourth quarter of 2018 when they peaked near 5 percent. This lower-interest rate environment, along with ongoing job growth and rising wages, is contributing to a gradual improvement in the marketplace,” said NAHB Chief Economist Robert Dietz. “At the same time, builders continue to deal with ongoing labor and lot shortages and rising material costs that are holding back supply and harming affordability.” Regionally, on a three-month moving average, sentiment in the Northeast jumped 6 points to 57; in the West, it rose 2 points to 71; in the Midwest up 1 point to 54; in the South, it gained 1 point to 68.
Industrial production falls 0.5% amid big decline in auto output
U.S. industrial production fell in April, dragged by a big drop in factory output as production of autos and auto parts continued to slide. The Federal Reserve says industrial output — reflecting total production at factories, utilities and mines — dropped 0.5% in April after a 0.2% March gain. Industrial production fell 0.5% in February. Manufacturing output fell 0.5%, led by a 2.6% decline in motor vehicles and parts, which has fallen in three of the past four months. Production at the nation’s utilities fell a sharp 3.5%. Production at mines, a sector that also covers oil and gas drilling, rose 1.6%. Manufacturing has struggled over the past year, reflecting weakness in auto sales and the global economy.
Retail sales declined in April as Americans cut back on spending
U.S. retail sales declined last month, as Americans cut back their spending on clothes, appliances, and home and garden supplies. Sales dropped 0.2% in April, the Commerce Department said Wednesday, after a big 1.7% jump in March. The March figure was revised upward from the originally reported figure of 1.6%. Car sales dropped 1.1% last month and sales at electronics and appliance stores dropped 1.3%. Economists are having a difficult time gauging the mood of consumers this year. Retail sales have been on a seesaw pattern, rising at a healthy pace in January, then falling in February, followed by the big jump in March and now a drop in April. The data suggests Americans are reluctant to spend freely, despite steady job gains and modest wage increases. Retail sales are closely watched because they make up about one-third of consumer spending, which drives most economic activity. Overall consumer spending, which includes spending on services such as haircuts and travel, jumped in March by the most in nearly a decade, but that followed small increases in the previous two months. As a result, even though the economy grew a healthy 3.2% at an annual rate in the first quarter, consumer spending grew at a modest pace and was not a primary driver of that growth. The weakness sales last month was widespread. Sales at clothing stores fell 0.2% and plunged 1.9% at home and garden supply stores. Furniture store sales were unchanged. Even the category that includes online retailers dropped. Excluding the volatile auto and gas categories, retail sales also fell 0.2%. The sales report dragged major U.S. markets down before the opening bell Wednesday.U.S. retail sales unexpectedly fell in April as motor vehicle purchases slumped, government data showed on Wednesday.
China is raising tariffs on $60 billion of US goods starting June 1
China will raise tariffs on $60 billion in U.S. goods in retaliation for the U.S. decision to hike duties on Chinese goods, the Chinese Finance Ministry said Monday. Beijing will increase tariffs on more than 5,000 products to as high as 25%. Duties on some other goods will increase to 20%. Those rates will rise from either 10% or 5% previously. The move follows President Donald Trump’s decision to raise duties on $200 billion in Chinese products to 25% from 10%. The world’s two largest economies have struggled to sign a trade deal and end a widening conflict that threatens to damage the global economy. The latest shot in the trade war rattled investors. Major U.S. stock indexes dove more than 2% Monday amid the escalation.
Fed’s Neel Kashkari says US is ‘in a very strong position’ in escalating trade war with China
Even amid substantial bouts of market tumult, Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari sees the U.S. as holding the upper hand in its trade showdown with China. Stocks took another sharp drop Monday, but Kashkari said broader economic indicators are showing little signs of stress as the two sides ratchet up their tariff duel. “Relative to China, the U.S. is in a very strong position,” the central bank official told CNBC’s “Squawk Box ” team. “Not only is our economy bigger, our economy is much less sensitive to trade. Trade is important to the U.S. economy, but it’s much more important to the Chinese economy, just as a share of its economy. “So if there’s a tit-for-tat strategy, and I’m not advocating it, but a tit-for-tat strategy would seem to lean toward the U.S. strength rather than the China strength.”
Trump to China President Xi: ‘You backed out!’
President Donald Trump blamed China’s President Xi Jinping for a trade deal falling apart between the two countries in the final week. Trump said to President Xi “you had a great deal...& you backed out” in a tweet on Monday. Following the tweet the Chinese Finance Ministry said China will raise tariffs on $60 billion of U.S. goods is response to Trump’s tariff hike. Trade talks broke down last week after the White House accused China of reneging on key portions of an agreement and then hiked the tariff rate to 25% on $200 billion of Chinese goods on Friday. President Trump also warned China on Monday not to retaliate to those new tariffs. It “will only get worse!,” he wrote, prior to news that Beijing will increase the tariffs to 25% from 10% on June 1. Trump said Friday that trade talks would continue with China but there are no official meetings planned in the future yet. President Trump warned China in a tweet on Saturday to ‘act now’ on trade or face a ‘far worse’ deal in his second term. White House Economic Advisor Larry Kudlow said Sunday that Beijing invited U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to engage in talks but travel plans have not been made. Kudlow also said that Trump and President Xi would likely meet at the June G-20 summit in Japan. Traders reacted negatively on Monday to Trump ratcheting up the rhetoric amid this tenuous time and China’s retaliatory tariffs. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped more than 700 points, while the S&P 500 was down 2.7% and Nasdaq 100 dropped 3.4%. The Dow lost 1.9% last week as the trade deal fell apart. China’s yuan was set for its worst daily fall in nine months on Monday. The yuan fell 0.8% to 6.9040, its weakest since December 27.
JP Morgan: The US-China tariff battle is just the start of a global trade reordering
As the relationships between countries shift over the next few decades, expect trade to remain a hot button issue, according to one analyst. That prediction comes as the U.S. and China continue to square off in a trade war that has roiled global markets. Last week, U.S. President Donald Trump hiked tariffs on billions of dollars worth of Chinese goods, and China threatened to retaliate. Those developments — which followed speculation that the world’s top two economies had been close to inking a trade agreement — sent shockwaves through global markets. As countries, including China, accrue more power on the global stage, investors should expect more trade arguments ahead, according to James Sullivan, head of Asia ex-Japan equity research at J.P. Morgan. “As we start to move toward a multi-polar world, I think we have to recognize that these trade conversations are not fits and starts,” Sullivan told CNBC’s “Squawk Box” on Monday. “I think we have to recognize as equity investors, in particular, this is now the new normal.” “These trade conversations are now part of the backdrop of global markets for the next ... 10 to 20 years as these countries and economies work out their relative place in the world and how we reorder the overall global structure to account for the rise of China, to account for a multi-polar environment,” he said.
The cost of Trump’s tariffs has fallen ‘entirely’ on US businesses and households: Goldman
Goldman Sachs said the cost of tariffs imposed by President Donald Trump last year against Chinese goods has fallen “entirely” on American businesses and households, with a greater impact on consumer prices than previously expected. The bank said in a note that consumer prices are higher partly because Chinese exporters have not lowered their prices to better compete in the US market. Trump has repeatedly — and inaccurately — claimed that China will pay for tariffs imposed by the U.S.
Beijing defiant on trade war: ‘No one should expect China to swallow bitter fruit’
The United States and China appeared at a deadlock over trade negotiations on Sunday as Washington demanded promises of concrete changes to Chinese law and Beijing said it would not swallow any “bitter fruit” that harmed its interests. The trade war between the world’s top two economies escalated on Friday, with the United States hiking tariffs on $200 billion worth of Chinese goods after President Donald Trump said Beijing “broke the deal” by reneging on earlier commitments made during months of negotiations. White House economic advisor Larry Kudlow told the “Fox News Sunday” program that China needs to agree to “very strong” enforcement provisions for an eventual deal and said the sticking point was Beijing’s reluctance to put into law changes that had been agreed upon. Kudlow said the U.S. tariffs would remain in place while negotiations continue. Beijing remained defiant. “At no time will China forfeit the country’s respect, and no one should expect China to swallow bitter fruit that harms its core interests,” the People’s Daily, a newspaper controlled by the Chinese ruling Communist Party, said in a commentary on Monday. It said Beijing was open to talks but would not yield on important issues of principle. China’s nationalist Global Times tabloid said in an editorial on Monday that the country had no reasons to fear a trade war. “The perception that China cannot bear it is a fantasy and misjudgment,” the commentary said. “If they weren’t being seriously provoked, the Chinese people would not favor any trade war. However, once the country is strategically coerced, nothing is unbearable for China in order to safeguard its sovereignty and dignity as well as the long-term development rights of the Chinese people.” On Sunday, Trump sought to portray the United States as being in an advantageous position. “We are right where we want to be with China,” Trump wrote on Twitter, saying U.S. purchasers of Chinese goods could either buy them from domestic manufacturers or from other nations. Trump also repeated an erroneous statement that the United States would be taking in “Tens of Billions of Dollars in Tariffs from China.” The tariffs are not paid by the Chinese government or by firms located in China. They are paid by importers of Chinese goods, usually American companies or the U.S.-registered units of foreign companies. These often pass on the costs to customers, mostly manufacturers and consumers in the United States. Kudlow, when asked who was paying, said “both sides will suffer on this,” contradicting Trump, although he added that the U.S. economy should be able to cope. “We’re in terrific shape in order to correct 20 years plus of unfair trading practices with China,” Kudlow said. ”... This is a risk we should and can take without damaging our economy in any appreciable way.”
If Trump slaps China with his threatened tariffs, the US consumer could pay
If President Donald Trump slaps China with all the tariffs he’s threatened, the U.S. consumer could take a hit. Trump on Sunday threatened to raise tariffs on $200 billion in goods, and possibly add tariffs to another $325 billion in goods, that had not been subject to them previously. According to Citigroup, 40% of consumer goods imported into the U.S. from China have not been affected yet by tariffs. So if the administration proceeds with the additional $325 billion in goods that means clothing, toys, shoes, furniture and electronics could be subject to more tariffs, and consumers could have to pick up the tab. Citigroup also said that could lead to some inflation in the currently low inflation environment. So far, it looks like trade talks will go forward this week after hitting a rough patch, with U.S. officials saying Chinese negotiators reversed themselves on some points of prior agreement. Trump administration officials said Monday they were preparing to move forward on raising the tariffs on $200 billion in goods Friday to 25% from 10%. Administration officials did not say what would happen to potential new tariffs on the $325 billion in goods, which would include consumer products. But some strategists doubted the U.S. would move forward on those tariffs at this point, since they could take months to implement. The increased tariffs would be upping the ante for the Trump administration, which launched tariffs on $50 billion in Chinese products last June. The administration then initiated 10% tariffs on $200 billion in goods, with a promise to raise them to 25% if talks didn’t go well. China retaliated in kind with its own tariffs, and is expected to do so again. Source: Strategas and Peterson Institute “The $50 billion is mostly on capital goods. The $200 billion focus is on capital goods and some consumer goods. The remaining goods that have not received a tariff are largely consumer goods,” said Cesar Rojas, Citigroup global economist. “For example, furniture, apparel, all those goods that have not received a major impact from tariffs so far.” Dan Clifton, head of policy research at Strategas Research, said the administration is threatening escalation, and Trump was trying to use the threats to get a deal with China this week. Before Trump’s tweets, there had been expectations a deal would be agreed this week, and sources had told CNBC last week that they had expected one by this Friday. Clifton said it would be difficult for tariffs to be implemented immediately on a new list of goods. According to Strategas, just 7% of toys and sporting goods, and footwear, are subject to tariffs. Of textiles and apparel imported from China, just 13% are subject to tariffs. “Expanding the list of goods that could face tariffs would take months to implement. This gives negotiators some time even if negotiations fail this week,” Clifton said.
The truth about Trump’s China tariffs: Many major US companies didn’t think they were still a big deal
President Donald Trump’s Sunday tweet threatening another round of tariffs against China shook investor confidence in markets around the world on Monday, but within the C-suites of major U.S. corporations, tariffs have not been viewed as among the most important issues to resolve in a trade war. Reduction of tariffs to pre-2016 levels was cited only by 5% of U.S.-based CFOs as an issue that they would like to see come out of a trade deal with China. Elimination of tariffs also was cited by only 5% of U.S.-based CFOs. Recent headlines citing Trump administration officials had hinted the trade war was nearing an end, and Chinese officials are still scheduled for meetings in Washington on Friday, even after Trump’s tariff threat. The biggest thing U.S. companies are looking for from a trade deal is “increased enforcement of U.S. patents and trademarks,” which was cited by 40% of CFOs. Another 30% cited increased access to Chinese markets for American companies.
Here’s where the jobs are — in one chart
Job gains in the services sectors continued to rocket higher in April as hiring remained hot for computer system designers, social workers and health-care professionals. Manufacturing, on the other hand, posted a third straight month of lackluster employment figures. CNBC studied the net changes by industry for April jobs based on the data from the Labor Department contained in the jobs report released Friday. The government said the U.S. economy added 263,000 jobs last month, more than the 190,000 increase expected by economists polled by Refinitiv. The business and professional services sector alone added 76,000 jobs, with strong hiring in computer systems design, temporary help services, and building and dwelling services like pest extermination, landscaping and housekeeping. The sector also includes lawyers, accountants and consultants. The health care and education sector — a consistent employment juggernaut — came in at second place with a gain of 62,000 jobs. Health care and social services, including ambulatory outpatient care, hospitals and nursing and resident facilities added 50,000 jobs. The manufacturing industry, a priority for President Donald Trump, failed to post a robust rebound in April after an anemic showing in March. The sector added just 4,000 jobs last month versus March’s zero growth and February’s 8,000 gain. “Total nonfarm payroll employment increased by 263,000 in April, compared with an average monthly gain of 213,000 over the prior 12 months,” the Labor Department said in a release. “In April, notable jobs gains occurred in professional and business services, construction, health care, and social assistance.” Leisure and hospitality had a healthy net job gain of 34,000 thanks to a surge in employment adds in the food service industry. That topped the preliminary March read of 33,000; the leisure employment gains for March were adjusted higher to 37,000 in subsequent releases. Retail trade employment shed 12,000 jobs following a loss of 15,000 jobs in March.
Vice President Pence says the Fed should cut interest rates, reconsider its dual mandate policy
Vice President Mike Pence believes the Federal Reserve should look to cut its benchmark interest rate due to the continued growth of the U.S. economy. “I think it might be time for us to consider lowering interest rates,” Pence told CNBC’s Eamon Javers on Friday. “We just don’t see any inflation in this economy at all.” Pence’s comments fall squarely in line with the rest of President Donald Trump’s confidantes at the White House. Pence, economic adviser Larry Kudlow and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin have all previously backed Trump’s call to lower interest rates.
Economist John Taylor thinks the Fed is ‘in a better place’ with interest rates
Raising interest rates have given the Federal Reserve some breathing room for the next time a downturn hits, economist John Taylor said Friday. The Stanford economist and developer of the Taylor rule model that determines where interest should be based on growth told CNBC that he sees a central bank that has returned to rules-based policy in recent years, which he considers a positive. “I think they made some good changes since they started to normalize. I think that’s a good thing,” Taylor told CNBC’s Steve Liesman during a “Squawk Box ” interview. “To get a normalized Fed is good for the economy. I think that’s good they’re in a better place at this point in case something happens.” Taylor reportedly had been on President Donald Trump’s short list for Fed appointments. However, his view on rates runs counter to the president’s, who has called for a 1 percentage point reduction in the benchmark funds rate. Using Taylor’s formula theoretically would put the funds rate around 3.5%, according to an Atlanta Fed calculator, though he did not express a view on where he thinks the right level is now. The current funds rate is targeted in a range between 2.25% and 2.5%. He also said he thinks the economy can break out of its long-standing trend growth of a “lousy” 2% and get up to 3%.